Title: 2602.12597v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.12597v1

Published Time: Mon, 16 Feb 2026 01:23:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
PISHYAR: A Socially Intelligent Smart Cane for Indoor Social 

# Navigation and Multimodal Human -Robot Interaction for Visually 

# Impaired People 

Mahdi Haghighat Joo 1, Maryam Karimi Jafari 1, Alireza Taheri 1*

> 1

Social and Cognitive Robotics Laboratory, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran 

* Corresponding author:  artaheri@sharif.edu  , Tel: +982166165531 

Abstract 

Visual impairments pose significant challenges to safe mob ility and situational awareness for visually impaired and 

low -vision individuals, particularly in socially dynamic indoor environments. This paper presents PISHYAR, a 

socially intelligent smart cane designed by our group to combine socially aware navigation with multimodal human -

AI interaction to support both physical mobility and interactive assistance. The system consists of two components: 

(1) a social navigation framework implemented on a Raspberry Pi 5 that integrates real -time RGB -D perception using 

an OAK -D Lite camera, YOLOv8 -based object detection, CO MPOSER -based collective activity recognition, D* Lite 

dynamic path planning, and haptic feedback via vibration motors for tasks such as locating a vacant seat; and (2) an 

agentic multimodal LLM -VLM interaction framework that integrates speech recognition, vision language models ,

large language models , and text -to -speech, with dynamic routing between voice -only and vision -only modes to enable 

natural voice -based communication, scene description, and object localization from visual input. The system is 

evalua ted through a combination of simulation -based tests, real -world field experiments, and user -centered studies. 

Results from simulated and real indoor environments demonstrate reliable obstacle avoidance and socially compliant 

navigation, achieving an overal l system accuracy of approximately 80% under different social conditions. Group 

activity recognition further shows robust performance across diverse crowd scenarios. In addition, a preliminary 

exploratory user study with eight visually impaired and low -vision participants evaluates the agentic interaction 

framework through structured tasks and a UTAUT -based questionnaire reveal s high acceptance and positive 

perceptions of usability, trust, and perceived sociability during our experiments . The results highlight the potential of 

PISHYAR as a multimodal assistive mobility aid that extends beyond navigation to provide socially interactive support 

for such users. 

Keywords: smart cane, socially assistive technology , visually impaired and low -vision users , social navigation , group 

activity recognition, large language models , human -robot interaction 1 Introduction 

In recent years, robotic systems have been rapidly developing to assist and enhance various aspects of human life, 

including delivery and service roles [1], industries [2] and healthcare [3]. One important application of these 

technologies is improving daily life for i ndividuals with special needs. Social robotics has shown strong potential in 

this area , including children with autism [4, 5], sign -language recognition [6], and lip -reading training for hearing -

impaired individuals [7]. Among these groups , visual impairments present significant challenges and mak e routine 

tasks difficult for affected individuals. 

Visual impairments remain a growing global concern, with ov er 2.2 billion individuals affected worldwide 

according to the World Health Organization. Among them, at least one billion people suffer from moderate to severe 

vision loss due to preventable or unaddressed conditions such as cataracts, uncorrected refract ive errors, diabetic 

retinopathy, glaucoma, trachoma, and presbyopia [8]. These impairments significantly reduce quality of life and limit 

personal independence. As the global population ages and the prevalence of chronic diseases rises, the need for 

advanced assistive technologies that support independent mobility and environ mental awareness has become 

increasingly urgent. 

Traditional mobility aids, such as white canes and guide dogs, while accessible and widely used, are often 

insufficient in complex and dynamic environments [9]. These tools typically lack the capability to provide detailed 

environmental context or real -time feedback, which are essential for safe and autonomous navigation. In response, 

there has been a growing focus on the development of intelligent assistive systems that integrate modern technologies 

such as sensors, embedded cameras, and real -time processing algorithms , to deliver actionable information to users 

through auditory, vibratory, or multimodal feedback mech anisms [10 ]. Beyond physical navigation support, assistive 

systems for visually impaired users increasingly emphasize interaction and communication. Human -robot interaction 

(HRI) plays a critical role in this context, as it enables not only functional assistance but also socially meaningful 

interactions between users and assistive devices [11 ].

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language Models (VLMs) have opened 

new possibilities for developing interactive and socially aware assistive technologies for visually impaired users [12 ].

In contrast to traditional rule -based systems, LLMs enable natural language communication, and VLMs allow the 

system to connect visual information with user requests. These features enable assistive devices such as smart canes 

to go beyond simple obstacle detection and provide richer services, including scene understanding, object localization, 

and conversational guidance. 

In this paper, we present PISHYAR , our developed socially intelligent smart cane designed to support visually 

impaired users through both social navigation and interactive assistance . The system is named PISHYAR (Persian: 

پیشیار  ), reflecting its dual role as a “pioneer” that guides the user and as a predictive assistant that anticipates upcoming 

environmental elements in front of the user. The proposed system provides two complementary but independently 

developed system -level contributions: 1) a socially aware navigation framework that integrates real -time perception, 

object detection, group activity recognition, and path planning for locating and navigating to vacant seats in indoor environ ments , and 2) an agentic multimodal interaction framework based on LLM -VLM cooperation that enables 

natural voice -based communication, scene description, and object localization. The system is evaluated through a 

combination of simulation -based tests and r eal -world experiments to assess navigation accuracy and socially aware 

behavior. In addition, a preliminary exploratory user stud y with eight visually impaired participants is conducted to 

initially investigate the multimodal interaction framework using a UTAUT -based questionnaire, which focuses on 

usability, perceived usefulness , perceived ease of use, user acceptance , intention to use, trust, and perceived social 

intelligence . An overview of the proposed system is shown in  Fig. 1.      

> Fig. 1An overview of the study :PISHYAR hardware design and its capabilities (for visually impaired individuals ).

2 Related Work s

Over the past two decades, significant efforts have been made to develop smart assistive technologies for visually 

impaired individuals. Among these, smart canes have attracted the most attention and can generally be categorized 

based on their core function , such as obstacle detection, navigation assistance, or support for daily activities. These 

categories are further subdivided based on sensor type and intended environment (indoor vs. o utdoor) [13 ].

Several studies have focused on obstacle detection. For example, Masud et al. [14 ] proposed a low -cost, wearable 

smart cane using Raspberry Pi 4B, camera, ultrasonic sensor, and Arduino, employing Viola -Jones and TensorFlow 

Object Detection for accurate scene classification and obstacle detection. Alashjaee et al. [15 ] introduced the 

HAODVIP -ADL system, an attention -driven deep learning approach combining YOLOv10, CapsNet, InceptionV3, 

and MHA -BiLSTM, achieving highly accurate (99.74%) object detection and safe navigation support while enabling 

family monitoring via a we b-based application. Bauer et al. [16 ] developed a low -cost, non -intrusive wearable system 

that estimates depth maps from color images, detects urban objects, and conveys 3D and semantic obstacle information 

via haptic or spoken feedback, achieving 87.99% mean accuracy in real -world outdoor navigation. Muktha et al. [17 ]

de veloped a smart cane equipped with ultrasonic sensors to detect nearby obstacles and provide haptic feedback via a arphones Camera Raspberry Pi   

> attery
> Vibration Motor
> STT TTS MVMPath Planning b ect etection roup Activity Recognition Haptic
> Feedback

bidirectional vibration motor before contact occurs. This cane was also able to assist visually impaired users with 

navigation using a voice assistant. 

Some studies have focused on supporting daily activities. Abdusalomov et al. [18 ] proposed an AI -based vision 

system using YOLOv5m for early indoo r fire detection, providing real -time alerts to blind and visually impaired 

individuals with high speed and accuracy. Dang et al. [19 ] developed a deep learning -based system for kitchen 

environments, which offers real -time object detection and interactive guidance via speech to enhance accuracy, 

autonomy, and safety in complex settings. 

Most recent developments target navigation and obsta cle avoidance. Slade et al. [20 ] developed the Augmented 

Cane, a low -cost, sensor -equipped white cane that provides steering assistance, obstacle avoidance, and ob ject 

recognition, improving walking speed by up to 35% and enhancing mobility, confidence, and safety. Feltner et al. [21 ]

combined a depth camera, Raspberry Pi, K inect sensor, and vibration motors to provide tactile feedback for obstacle 

awareness. Agrawal et al. [22 ] created a perceptual robotic cane with haptic guidance, enabling users to identify and 

approach preferred seats in public spaces. The system used RGB -D cameras, inertial measurement units (IMUs), 

vibration motors, and portable processors, integrating SLAM and goal -oriented planning for accurate seat recognition .

Mai et al. [23 ] introduced a LiDAR and vision -based smart cane capable of real -time obstacle detection and 

localization. The system employed 2D LiDAR, RGB -D cameras, GPS, and a Jetson Nano processor. Object 

recognition was achieved using YOLOv5, and SLAM was used for environment mapping. Real -world evaluations 

showed pedestrian detection accuracy of 84.6%, zebra -crossing detection at 71.8%, and overall o bject recognition 

accuracy of 61.2% across 86 object types. 

Finding vacant seats is an important need for visually impaired individuals [24 ]. This has motivated re search 

toward goal -aware assistive systems that navigate users toward specific targets. However, prior works do not consider 

social etiquette during navigation —a critical factor for user comfort and privacy. 

With recent advances in LLMs, their use in assis tive technologies for visually impaired individuals has gained 

increasing attention. Recent studies have explored LLM - and VLM -based approaches for tasks such as object 

detection, scene description, and navigation assistance [25 , 26 ]. Video -based LLMs such as GPT -4o [27 ] have 

demonstrated strong performance in real -time tasks related to home and social environments, which indicates their 

potential for interactive assistance. Other works have shown that these models can generate navigation instructions 

and contextual guidance [25 ], while safety -aware systems using GPT -4V [26 ] highlight the ability of VLMs to assess 

environmental risks in real time. 

Several recent works have attempted to integrate LLMs and VLMs into practical assistive systems for visually 

impaired users. MASA [28 ] proposed a wearable system using GPT -4o to interpret camera input and user queries 

through an agentic pipeline, with results showing high usability in user studies. NAVISIGHT [29 ] combined 

YOLO v11n and LLaVA for object recognition and scene description, although it did not include user evaluations. 

Nevasekar et al. [30 ] in troduced a robot -assisted navigation system using YOLO v8 and LLaVA with retrieval -

augmented generation (RAG) for visual question answering. PathFinder [31 ] employed LLMs and VLMs together with monocular depth estimation for navigation, and measured user engagement and response time. Hao et al. [32 ]

proposed a system that uses a VLM for scene understanding and hazard detection, with responses generated by a 

Vicuna -based LLM, but without interactive navigation experiments. Although these studies show the potential of 

LLMs and VLMs for assistive tasks, they often focus on specific tasks and do not fully address socially aware 

navigation or integrated interaction in smart canes . Unlike previous methods , our designed robot, PISHYAR , integrates 

socially aware navigation and agentic multimodal interaction within a single smart cane platform, evaluated through 

both technical experiments and user studies. 

3 Hardware esign 

This section presents the design and implementation of PISHYAR ha rdware, which constitutes the first core 

component of the proposed system. The hardware is designed to support environmental perception, onboard 

computation, and intuitive user feedback, which enables both social navigation and interactive functionalities. 

PISHYAR integrates a depth -sensing camera (OAK -D Lite), a Raspberry Pi 5 as the central processing unit, vibration 

motors for haptic feedback, a power supply module, and a custom mechanical cane structure. 

One of the key components of the system is the depth -sensing camera, whose primary function is to acquire 

information from the environment and calculate the distances of objects relative to the user. The OAK -D Lite camera 

was selected as the primary sensor due to its balance of depth measurement accuracy, real -time processing capability, 

ease of integration, and low power consumption. In addition to providing high -resolution RGB -D data, this camera is 

equipped with an internal neural processing unit (Myriad X VPU), which allows computer vision algorithms to be 

executed independently without reliance on an external processor. This feature reduces the computational load on the 

central processing unit and improves system response time. Moreover, the camera incl udes a built -in six -degree -of -

freedom IMU, eliminating the need for a separate motion sensor module and contributing to a more lightweight design. 

For the central processing unit, criteria such as high computational power, support for multiple inputs and o utputs, 

simultaneous multi -sensor data processing, and compatibility with machine learning algorithms were considered. 

Accordingly, the Raspberry Pi 5 was chosen as the processing core. With its powerful processor and adaptable 

communication interfaces, th is board can simultaneously manage processes such as navigation, sensor control, and 

real -time feedback delivery. 

The power supply module uses two 18650 lithium -ion batteries connected in series to provide 7.4 V, managed by 

a two -cell battery management sy stem (BMS) for balanced charging and protection. A power switch enables manual 

control of the system. The output is regulated to 5 V using an XL4015 DC –DC buck converter and delivered to the 

Raspberry Pi 5 via a USB Type -C port. 

To provide user feedback, t hree vibration motors were installed on the cane handle, each corresponding to a 

specific direction (left, right, and forward). These motors are controlled by the Raspberry Pi 5 and are activated for 

one second depending on the required direction of moveme nt. This haptic feedback system provides a simple way for 

visually impaired users to receive spatial information. Mechanical design and component placement were fully performed using SolidWorks 2023. Special attention was 

given to handle ergonomics, weight distribution, and ease of maintenance. After completing the design, components 

were manufactured using FDM 3D pri nting, which not only reduced production costs but also allowed rapid design 

modifications and customization. The initial version of the cane, consisting of only the basic structural elements, 

weighed approximately 500 grams. After integrating the camera, processing unit, vibration motors, battery, and other 

electronics, the total weight of the smart cane reached around 1 kg. The total cost of the entire assembly is 

approximately 400 USD.  Fig. 2 illustrates an overall view of PISHYAR .   

> ab
> Fig. 2The developed PISHYAR smart cane prototype: (a) SolidWorks 3D model of the cane structure, and (b) the implemented
> physical prototype.

4 Social Navigation for Indoor Vacant Seat Finding 

This section presents the second core component of the proposed system, focusing on the design and implementation 

of socially aware indoor navigation for vacant seat finding. The goal of this component is to enable safe and socially 

appropriate indoor navigation by com bining object detection, path planning, and group activity recognition. This part 

of the system primarily relies on the depth -sensing camera, the onboard processing unit, and the haptic feedback 

actuators. This section first introduces the system modules f or social navigation, then describes the execution process 

and evaluation methods. 

4.1 Social Navigation System Architecture 

4.1.1 b ect and bstacle etection for Social Navigation 

As part of the proposed system, this section focuses on socially aware navigation in indoor environments, with the 

specific goal of identifying vacant seats and guiding the user toward them. To achieve this goal, a high -accuracy, real -

time obstacle detection model was required. After evaluating several options, the YOLO v8 n architecture was selected as the primary model which can be executed on the camera processing unit [33 ]. Trained on the COCO dataset, this 

model is capable of recognizing objects from 80 different classes across a large -scale annotated dataset. 

After detecting objects in the environment, target selection was performed based on two criteria: the unoccupied 

seat and the shortest distance to the user. Distances were calculated using the Euclidean metric. Once the target was 

determined, the coordinates of the seat and obstacles were provided to the path planning algorithm. 

4.1.2 Path Planning Algorithm 

Another key component of the proposed system is the path planning algorithm. The purpose of the algorithm is to 

provide a safe and shortest path while respecting all constraints of the problem. Additionally, given the coordinates of 

the start point, destination, and obstacles , the algorithm must be able to generate an optimal path in real time, and 

instantly recalculate an alternative route if the previous path becomes blocked. Accordingly, the D* Lite algorithm, a 

grid -based optimized method suitable for dynamic environments [34 ], was employed. To simplify navigation, the 

user’s permissible directions were limited to three main options: forward, left, and right. After selecting the target and 

sending the coordinate s, the path proposed by the algorithm was transmitted to PISHYAR , and user guidance was 

executed using the three primary directions. 

4.1.3 roup Activity Recognition Using C MP S R

To train and evaluate the group activity recognition model, the standard Co llective Activity Dataset was used, which 

was first collected and annotated in 2009 by Choi and colleagues [35 ]. This dataset includes five social activity classes: 

queuing, talking, waiting, walking, and crossing. In our study , Given the high similarity between “crossing” and 

“walking,” these two act ivities were considered as a single class, referred to as “walking”. In total, it contains 2,543 

ten -frame clips with a resolution of 480×640 pixels. Videos were recorded from different angles to ensure spatial 

diversity and introduce realistic visual chal lenges. Each clip is accompanied by detailed labels, including the type of 

activity, individuals’ orientations, and their positions within each frame. 

Recognizing collective activity is one of the most challenging tasks in video understanding due to the ne ed to 

capture spatiotemporal relationships among people and objects. Traditional approaches based on RGB images or 

optical flow, besides being heavily dependent on background and scene conditions, often face issues such as 

environmental bias and privacy co ncerns. To address these challenges, this work adopts the COMPOSER architecture 

proposed by Zhou et al. [36 ], a multiscale transformer -based model that performs group activity recognition using 

only 2D/3D human key -point coordinates rather than raw RGB images. By modeling interactions between indiv iduals 

at multiple semantic levels, COMPOSER enables reliable recognition of collective activities while reducing sensitivity 

to background variations and preserving user privacy. In this study, COMPOSER is used as a pretrained framework 

and retrained on t he Collective Activity Dataset for the target activity classes. 

The COMPOSER framework represents collective activities using a hierarchical, multi -scale tokenization scheme 

that encodes human motion and social context from body key points to group -level interactions, while also 

incorporating object information. A global clip -level token aggregates contextual information across all scales to 

enable robust recognition of group activities. To extract the 17 key body points required as input to th e COMPOSER model for activity recognition, this research utilized the MediaPipe library [37 ]. Although this approach is different 

from the method originally used in the COMPOSER architecture, it was chosen because it is simpler and has a faster 

processing speed , which makes it more suitable for real -time deployment. 

For model configuration, the hidden size for token representation was set to 128, shared across query, key, and 

value vectors in all transformer encoders; while the hidden dimension of the MLP layers was fixed at 1024. Th e

architecture employs two multiscale transformer blocks, each containing separate encoders for the different scales. 

The number of attention heads was set to 2, 8, 2, and 2 for the four scales, respectively; with corresponding dropout 

rates of 0.5, 0.2, 0 .2, and 0. ReLU was chosen as the activation function in the MLP layers. To improve generalization, 

several data augmentation techniques were applied, including horizontal flipping, horizontal and vertical shifting, and 

random actor dropout; additionally, small random noise (±1 pixel) was added to the coordinates during certain steps. 

For optimization, the Adam optimizer was used with an initial learning rate of 0.0005, reduced to 0.0001 after 40 

epochs, and a batch size of 384. 

4.2 Social Navigation xecution Process 

The path planning process in this system is carried out through a set of structured and interconnected steps to ensure 

the  visually impaired  user is guided safely while adhering to social navigation etiquette in public spaces. These steps 

are shown in  Fig. 3. The execution steps, incorporating group activity recognition, are defined as follows: 

1.  Initial User Positioning: The user holds the cane and is given 10 seconds to position themselves correctly and 

adjust the cane at a standard angle (approximately 45° relative to the horizontal plane). This time allows stabilization 

and prevents initial data collection errors. 

2. ata Acquisition and Initial Analysis: After the initial period, the RGB -D camera begins capturing data. The 

first 10 frames are sent to both the obstacle and object detection model (utilizing YOLO) and the group activity 

recognition architecture.  To improve accuracy, distance data from these frames are compared. If an object’s distance 

deviates more than 10% from the mean of the 10 frames, it is identified as an outlier and removed. If a seat is 

initially selected as the target and is not occupied by another person, this choice remains fixed until the end of the 

path. Even if better seats are detected later, the originally selected target does not change. 

3. roup Activity Recognition: Those initial 10 frames are sent to be processed by the group activity recognition 

model. If no collective activity is detected, the system proceeds to standard path planning.  In this case, the system 

skips social condition adaptation and performs path planning using only obstacle detection and goal information. 

The detection of collective activities is performed only at the beginning of the movement, under the assumption that 

no new human groups enter the im mediate navigation area during execution. 

4. Social Condition Adaptation:  The environment is divided into grid cells for path planning, and detected human 

groups are expanded into surrounding cells, which are then treated as obstacles . If a collective activity (e.g., walking, 

talking, queuing) is identified, path planning decisions are adjusted according to the activity type: • Walking Activity: The system waits 10 seconds for the path to clear, indicated to the user via three short 

activations of the forward -direction vibration motor. If the group persists, normal path planning resumes. 

• Talking Activity: The area occupied by the talking group is marked as non -navigable, and two adjacent cells 

are blocked for safe distancing. 

• Queuing or Waiting Activity: The entire group is treated as a restricted area, with one extra row adjacent to the 

group also marked as non -navigable to maintain minimum social distance. 

5. b ect Analysis and Path Planning Input: Following initial data filtering and collecti ve activity recognition, 

detected valid objects and obstacles, along with their distances from the cane, are sent to the D* Lite algorithm to 

compute the optimal path. 

6. User uidance Start: The initial direction (left, right, or forward) is communicated to the user through the 

vibration motors based on the calculated path, considering any social condition adjustments. 

7. Movement Monitoring and Position Verification:  After the user moves, th eir displacement is analyzed by 

comparing data from 10 consecutive frames. The measurement metric uses 10 randomly selected pixels in the image 

to estimate displacement consistency across frames. Step length is set to 40 cm for blind users, slightly shorter than 

the average sighted step, to improve accuracy and safety. 

8. Next irection Announcement: If the movement and direction are verified with acceptable accuracy (less than 

10% deviation from predictions), the next direction is calculated and communicated to the user. 

9. Target Review and Alternative Path Planning: At each step, the algorithm checks if the target seat has been 

occupied. If so, a new alternative path is suggested. 

10. Cumulative rror Correction: To mitigate errors from sen sor inaccuracies or model drift, the user’s calculated 

position is compared with the reference map after every three steps, and corrected if significant deviation is detected. 

11. Iteration Until Reaching the oal: This process loops until the user reaches the final target. Fig. 3 Social navigation workflow .

4. 3 Social Navigation valuation Methodology 

4. 3.1 Simulation - ased valuation 

In the first step, the combination of the obstacle detection model and the path planning algorithm was evaluated using 

simulation . For this simultaneous evaluation, Webots robotic simulation platform [38 ] was used. In this environment, 

a humanoid model equipped with the smart cane was implemented. The cane was fitted with an RGB -D camera and 

a six -degree -of -freedom IMU. The camera fed image f rames to the YOLO model to identify objects and estimate their 

distances relative to the user, while the IMU recorded the user’s movement direction in real time. To increase the 

safety of blind users’ movements , the simulated environment was divided into c ells measuring 40 cm each, slightly 

shorter than the average step length of sighted individuals. This evaluation was conducted solely in the presence of 

static obstacles and human figures ; where the number, type, and spatial arrangement of obstacles and objects were 

randomly varied in each test to generate diverse environmental layouts, allowing the system’s behavior to be examined 

under controlled conditions. The designed model was evaluat ed across ten such scenarios to verify the accuracy and 

reliability of the obstacle detection and path planning modules, and to confirm their correct integration and coordinated 

operation prior to real -world deployment. The primary success criterion in thi s simulation stage was the system’s 

ability to guide the user toward the target seat without collisions. 

4. 3.2 Real -World valuation of roup Activity Recognition 

In the next step, the trained COMPOSER model was evaluated on real -world data obtained from t he camera mounted 

on PISHYAR , besides its evaluation on the test portion of the training dataset . For this purpose, after the required C MP S R          

> Collective
> Activity
> etected
> Wait elay lock Area
> uffer Cells
> lock Area
> xtended
> uffer
> WAITIN TA KIN WA KIN
> *ite
> xtract irection
> FT RI HT FRWAR
> Haptic Feedback
> Movement
> Verification
> Valid Path
> N
> Target
> Reached
> Y S
> Y S
> N
> Y

preprocessing, ten consecutive frames from the camera’s output were provided as input to the model to perform 

collective activity recognition. 

For performing this evaluation , experiments were designed and conducted across 20 different scenarios. In these 

experiments, each group of collective activities was present in the environment at least five times to examine the 

influence of position and viewing angle variations on model accuracy. In order to replicate real -world difficulties, the 

test conditions were created to be as varied as possible in terms of camera angles and environmental settings . Fig. 4

present s an example of images captured during these experiments, illustrating the variety of environments and test 

conditions.     

> ab
> Fig. 4Example images captured by PISHYAR for group activity recognition : (a) queuing activity, and (b) talking activity .

4. 3.3 Field valuation of the System Across Scenarios 

In the last step of evaluation of the whole system , including the hardware and the algorithms, we decided to perform 

field evaluation across some scenarios. The evaluation process was conducted in an indoor environment measuring 

approximately 3 meters in width and 5 meters in length, which was suitable for flexible arrangement of obstacles and 

positioning of human groups at various angles and locations. The purpose of this setup was to accurately simulate 

real -world conditions so that the performance of PISHYAR could be thoroughly tested under a wide range of 

environmental and behavioral variations. Notably, the evaluations were performed by a sighted individual with their 

eyes closed to replicate the experience of a visually impaired person. This approach was adopted for safety reasons 

during early -stage testing and to ensure controlled and repeatable evaluation conditions. To assess overall system 

performance, 15 experimental scenarios were designed and executed, divided into three categories: 

• Scenario 1, Static bstacles without Human roups: Only fixed obstacles such as tables, chairs, and other 

objects were present, and the goal was to reach an empty seat without collisions. This scenario served as the initial 

evaluation of system stability. Each scenario was repeated three times with random variations in obstacle positions 

and target seat location to assess adaptability. • Scenario 2, Static bstacles with Target Changes: Similar to Scenario 1, but during movement, the target seat 

was suddenly occupied by another person. The system had to quickly identify an alternative path and guide the 

user to another empty seat. This scenario was also repeated three times with randomized obstacle and target 

placements to evaluate system flexibility and replanning capability. 

• Scenario 3, Social Path P lanning with Human roups: The most complex and research -focused scenario 

involved the presence of human groups in the environment. The system needed to detect the group, analyze their 

activity type, and navigate in a way that maintained social etiquette, such as keeping proper distance and avoiding 

disturbance. This scenario was executed in nine different configurations: three for walking, three for talking, and 

three for waiting activities. Due to the similarity between waiting and queuing cases, only the waiting class was 

used for execution. 

These scenarios were designed to evaluate all system components, from object detection and path planning to 

social activity recognition and feedback delivery, under conditions that closely simulate real -world operatio n. To 

comprehensively assess the system’s performance, the evaluation was based on three key and essential criteria: 1) 

successfully reaching the designated target, 2) a voiding collisions with any obstacles along the path, and 3) s trictly 

observing social etiquette and interactions in the presence of human groups. In each scenario, the system’s 

performance was considered acceptable only if all three criteria were met simultaneously.  Fig. 5 show s an example 

from one of the evaluated scenarios, illustrating the diversity of positions and testing conditions. Fig. 5 Example of a social navigation evaluation scenario. 

5 M- and V M- ased Social Interaction Framework 

This section presents the third core component of the proposed system, focusing on the development and evaluation 

of PISHYAR ’s social and conversational intelligence. This component integrates LLM and VLM to enable natural 

dialogue and visual sce ne understanding. Its implementation relies on key hardware elements of the smart cane, 

including the Raspberry Pi, depth -sensing camera, power supply, physical cane structure, and earphones for audio 

feedback. This section first introduces the multimodal interaction architecture and system modules, then describes the 

agentic interaction framework, and finally presents the user study design and evaluation metrics. 

5.1 Multimodal Social Interaction Architecture 

The proposed multimodal interactive system cons ists of several interconnected modules that collaboratively enable 

natural and multimodal communication between the user and PISHYAR . These modules are described as follows: 

5.1.1 Speech Recognition Module STT and KWS 

A speech -to -text (STT) module is used to convert the user’s spoken input into text. Google Speech Recognition was 

employed due to its support for the Persian language , which is accessible through the Python SpeechRecognition 

library. In addition, a keyword spotting (KWS) module was integr ated to activate the STT system only when the user explicitly calls the system using predefined phrases such as “Hello, PISHYAR” or “PISHYAR, my friend.” To achieve 

this, the Vosk small Persian STT model was used to perform KWS. Vosk is an open -source tool kit that works well on 

local devices without an online connection and allows accurate voice recognition in a variety of languages, including 

Persian. Because the Vosk small model is lightweight and effective but inaccurate for transcribing long or complex 

spoken words, it was primarily utilized for keyword spotting. 

5.1.2 Scene escription Module V M

The system utilizes GPT -4o as a VLM for indoor scene description. Whenever the user requests a description of the 

surrounding environment, an image captured by the OAK -D camera is sent to the VLM, and the generated textual 

description is returned to the sy stem. 

5.1.3 b ect etection Module Y 

Object detection is performed using the YOLOv8n model in conjunction with the VLM. This module detects objects 

in the environment and estimates their distance from the user using depth information from the RGB -D c amera, which 

is converted into approximate step counts. This module runs the YOLO on the camera’s internal neural processing 

unit instead of the Raspberry pi. 

5.1.4 Natural anguage ialogue Module M

GPT -4o is employed as the core LLM responsible for m anaging user interaction. The LLM processes the user’s textual 

input and determines whether visual perception is required. It has access to the outputs of both the VLM and the 

YOLO module to generate context -aware responses. Additionally, it is capable of answering general -purpose 

questions independent of visual input. 

5.1.5 ate and Time Provider Module 

This module uses Python’s built -in tools to get the current system date and time . It then converts them into the Persian 

(Jalali) calendar when requested by the user. 

5.2 Agentic Interaction Framework 

The interaction framework is designed as an agentic system , in which the LLM acts as a decision -making agent that 

dynamically routes user requests and invokes perception and dialogue modules b ased on the inferred intent. The reason 

for using an agentic interaction framework is to enable context -aware control over multiple system modules and reduc e

unnecessary computation. By treating the LLM as a n agent, the system can interpret user intent and dynamically 

decide which perception and dialogue components should be activated, rather than executing all modules continuously. 

This design is particularly suitable for assistive systems, where efficient resource usage is critical. The agentic 

workflow o f PISHYAR is shown in  Fig. 6. All prompts used for the LLM and VLM components are provided in the 

Appendix .

According to  Fig. 6, i nteraction with the system begins when the user calls “PISHYAR,” which activates the STT 

module for a command input. The user’s speech is converted into text and forwarded to an LLM -based routing module ,

referred to as the Interaction Mode Router IMR . Based on the content of the user’s request, this router selects one 

of two operational modes: VISION mod e, which involves camera -based perception for scene description or object detection, and VOICE mode , which does not require visual input and is used for general dialogue, including date and 

time queries. The routing between VOICE and VISION modes enables t he camera and vision modules to be activated 

only when visual input is required. This reduces unnecessary computational load and power consumption on the 

embedded hardware, which is particularly important for assistive devices. This design introduces a tra de -off between 

responsiveness and computational efficiency, as mode switching may cause slight delays; however, it enables more 

efficient resource utilization. 

In VISION mode, a secondary LLM -based router, referred to as the Vision Task Router VTR , determines 

whether the user’s request corresponds to SCENE mode (scene description) or OBJECT mode (object detection) . The 

VLM module is utilized in both cases; however, the YOLO module is activated only in OBJECT mode in order to 

estimate object distances. Upon entering this mode, the camera is initialized and an image is captured. The VLM 

processes the image to generate a scene description, while the YOLO module operates for a duration of two seconds 

to detect objects and estimate their distances. This time window was selected to ensure robust detection of all visible 

objects. Detected objects are filtered to retain unique instances, and estimated distances are converted into step counts. 

The outputs of the VLM and YOLO modules are then transmitted to the LLM, which synthesizes a final response to 

the user. 

In VOICE mode , if the user requests temporal information, the output of the Python date and time provider 

module is passe d to the LLM to generate the response. For all other queries, the LLM generates responses 

independently. Finally, the LLM’s textual output is sent to the TTS module, and the synthesized audio is transferred 

to the user through earphones. 

Fig. 6 The agentic workflow of PISHYAR. IMR      

> VMV M
> Y
> Time
> Question
> VIC VISI N
> SC N J CT
> ate Time
> Y S
> M
> N
> Keyword
> etected
> STT
> TTS
> Y S
> N
> VTR
> KWS

5. 3 User Study esign and valuation Metrics 

5. 3.1 xperimental Setup 

The use r study experimental setup consisted of an indoor room environment. Participants initially sat on a chair 

positioned at the starting point, where instructions were provided and the test began. At a distance of approximately 

two meters from the starting position, a table and two additional chairs were placed at the opposite end of the room. 

Several everyday objects were arranged on the table, including a water bottle, a cup, an apple, a spoon, a fork, a book, 

and a notebook. You can see the setup environment on  Fig. 7.  

> Fig. 7Experimental setup: (a) room environment, (b) object arrangement on the table.

5. 3.2 xperimental Scenario 

At the beginning of each trial, while participants were seated and received verbal instructions about the tasks , they 

were encouraged to physically explore the smart cane to become familiar with the device. After this introduction, the 

test session began . The participants were supposed to do at least 4 tasks , and if they wanted, they could ask PISHYAR 

for any other desired commands in the end. 

PISHYAR first introduced itself, and the participant heard the introduction through the earphones. The participant 

then called PISHYAR, triggering the system. Upon receiving the response “Yes, I am listening” from PISHYAR and 

through the earphones, the STT module was activated, and the participant asked about the current date and time. The 

IMR selected the VOICE mode, and the system retrieved the requested information and responded via the TTS 

module. 

In the second task, the participant again called PISHYAR and requested a description of the surrounding 

environment. The LLM router s selected VISION mode and then SCENE mode. An image captured by the camera was 

processed by the VLM, and the LLM generated a response based on the scene description. The resulting audio output 

was delivered through the earphones. 

In the third task, the participant asked the system to locate a chair. The system entered VISION and then OBJECT 

mode. The VLM and YOLO modules generated perception outputs, which were used by the LLM to pr oduce the 

response. If YOLO successfully detected the chair, the response included an estimated distance in terms of steps; otherwise, the response was generated based solely on the VLM output. After locating the chair, the participant stood 

up, walked tow ard it, and sat down. 

In the fourth task , the participant held PISHYAR in one hand, oriented toward the right, and asked the system to 

locate the water bottle that is on the table to their right. The system again operated in VISION mode, activating both 

th e VLM and YOLO modules, and detected the water bottle on the edge of the table, enabling the participant to reach 

out and grasp it. After completing this task, the participant was allowed to ask any additional questions of their choice, 

which were handled by the LLM in VOICE mode . They could also request any other perception task from PISHYAR. 

Finally, the participant said goodbye to the system, and the session concluded. 

All interactions were conducted in the Persian language . The experiment including exp lanations, doing the tasks, 

and answering the questions, lasts about 20 to 25 minutes for each participant . The log of the interactions was also 

captured and saved , which consists what has been transferred between the participant and PISHYAR. A participant 

interacting with PISHYAR is shown in  Fig. 8.    

> Fig. 8A participant interacting with PISHYAR during our user study.

5. 3.3 Participants 

Eight p articipants were recruited from a local school for visually impaired individuals. The average age was 11.25 

years (SD = 3.5), with ages ranging from 7 to 18 years. All participants were male and not totally blind and had varying 

degrees of visual impairment, including partial vision, light perception, and various types of visual distortions. Six out 

of the eight participants had prior expe rience using AI applications such as ChatGPT or Copilot, whereas only two 

participants had previous experience using a white cane. 

5. 3.4 Questionnaire and Acceptance Measures 

Participants were asked a set of questions both before and after the experiment, and oral consent for participation was 

also obtained. Before the experiment , participants were asked the following questions about their prior experience 

with any smart or non -smart white cane and any conversational AI applications :• Have you ever used a white cane (a mobility cane for people who are visually impaired)? 

• Have you ever used applications such as ChatGPT or other voice -based smart assistants? 

After completing the tasks, participants answered a questionnaire based on the Unified Theory of Acceptance and 

Use of Technology (UTAUT) [39 ], focusing on their interaction with PISHYAR as a socially intelligent cane to 

measure their acceptance of using this new technology. The questionnaire includes these items: Anxiety (AN), Attitude 

Towards Technology (ATT), Facilitating Conditions (FC), Int ention to Use (IU), Perceived Adaptiveness (PAD), 

Perceived Ease of Use (PEU), Perceived Usefulness (PU), Perceived Enjoyment (PE), Perceived Sociability (PS), 

Social Influence (SI), Social Presence (SP), and Trust (TR). The questionnaire statements are sh own in  Table 1.

Responses were recorded using a 5 -point Likert scale, and researchers documented the participants’ answers.   

> Table 1Twelve common questionnaire statements adopted from UTAUT, rated orally by participants on a 5 -point Likert scale
> after the experiment.

No.  Item  Statement 

1 AN  If I should use PISHYAR , I would be afraid to break something. 

2 ATT  PISHYAR would make life more interesting. 

3 FC  I know enough of PISHYAR to make good use of it. 

4 IU  I’m certain to use PISHYAR in the future .

5 PA  I think PISHYAR can be adaptive to what I need. 

6 P U I find PISHYAR easy to use. 

7 PU  I think PISHYAR can help me with many things. 

8 P I enjoy doing things with PISHYAR. 

9 PS  I find PISHYAR pleasant to interact with. 

10  SI  I think it would give a good impression if I should use PISHYAR. 

11  SP  I can imagine PISHYAR to be a living creature. 

12  TR  I would follow the advice PISHYAR gives me. 

6 Results and iscussion 

6.1 valuation of Socially Aware Navigation Performance 

6. 1. 1 Simulation - ased valuation of bstacle etection and Path Planning 

Results of the simulation showed that in nine out of ten scenarios , the path planning algorithm successfully identified 

the optimal route and ensured correct guidance wit hout accidents or obstacle contact. In only one case, due to specific 

environmental conditions and obstacle arrangement, the algorithm’s performance required further optimization.  Fig. 

9 illustrates the different stages of the path planning process in one of these simulated scenarios, providing a clear 

representation of how the system detects obstacles and selects the appropr iate route. Fig. 9 Representative stages of obstacle detection and path planning in the Webots simulation environment. The humanoid model 

> equipped with the smart cane navigates toward the target chair while avoiding static obstacle s.

6. 1. 2 Training and Validation Results of the C MP S R Architecture 

From the entire dataset, approximately 70% (equivalent to 1,778 clips) was used for model training, while 30% (765 

clips) was allocated for performance evaluation. The model achieved a Top -1 accuracy of 95.7% , which is consistent 

with the reported result i n the original paper [36 ]. The confusion matrix of the model is shown in  Fig. 10 .Fig. 10 Confusion matrix of the COMPOSER architecture evaluated on the Collective Activity dataset, showing classification 

> performance across walking, waiting, queuing, and talking activities.

Analysis of this matrix shows that the model achieved a flawless perfo rmance in classifying the talking class, 

reaching an accuracy of 100%. The highest level of confusion occurred between the walking and waiting classes, 

where in a few cases, samples from these two classes were misclassified. The classification accuracy for the queueing 

class was also very high, at 93%. 

These results demonstrate the remarkable efficiency of the COMPOSER model in recognizing collective activities 

in diverse and complex environments. The only major challenge lies in distinguishing between beha viorally similar 

activities such as walking and waiting, which could be improved by enhancing the training dataset or employing more 

advanced preprocessing techniques. Overall, the developed model shows strong potential for practical applications 

and real -world scenarios. 

6. 1.3 Real -World valuation of the C MP S R Architecture 

Fig. 11  presents the COMPOSER model’s accuracy in each of the 20 experimental conditions, providing a clear visual 

representation of its strengths and weaknesses in different scenarios and enabling a more detailed analysis of successes 

and prediction errors in each test. 

The results of this evaluation showed that in 17 out of 20 scenarios , the model was able to correctly predict the 

group activity present in the scene indicating acceptable accuracy even under challenging conditions (In all 20 

scenarios, the correct label appeared among the model’s top three predictions). Among the three misclassifications, 

one case involved an incorrect recognition of the waiting class, while the other two i nvolved incorrect recognition of 

the walking class. In all these cases, the two classes were substituted for each other —a predictable and justifiable 

outcome given the behavioral and motion similarities between these activities. Similar misclassification p atterns were 

also observed in the model’s training results on the Collective Activity dataset. Considering the limited number of experiments and the complexity of real -world conditions, the overall accuracy 

of 85% obtained in this evaluation can be regarde d as satisfactory for practical applications, highlighting the model’s 

strong potential for integration into intelligent assistive systems.    

> Fig. 11 Accuracy of the COMPOSER architecture across 20 real -world experimental scenarios, illustrating correct and incorrect
> group activity predictions under varying environmental conditions.

6. 1.4 System - evel Performance valuation of PISHYAR 

The results obtained from evaluating PISHYAR in the three defined scenarios are as follows: 

• Scenario 1, Presence of Static bstacles without Human roups: In this scenario, the system successfully 

completed all three trials. PISHYAR guided the user to the destination (vacant chair) without any collisions with 

static obstacles. These results demon strate the stable performance and high accuracy of the system in 

environments with non -moving obstacles. The average time per trial in this scenario was approximately 25 

seconds, indicating a fast system response. 

• Scenario 2, Static bstacles with Changing Target Position Midway: This scenario was more complex than 

the first. The system successfully completed 2 out of 3 trials, correctly finding an alternative path and guiding the 

user to the newly available vacant chair. In the unsuccessful trial, the primary cause was the user mo ving too close 

to the initial target chair, causing other chairs to move out of the depth camera’s field of view. Additionally, 

persistent errors in data from the camera and IMU sensor prevented PISHYAR from correctly identifying 

alternative chairs and cal culating the proper path. The average time per trial in this scenario was approximately 

30 seconds, reflecting increased processing and decision -making time due to environmental complexity. 

• Scenario 3 – Social Navigation in the Presence of Human roups: Th is scenario was the most challenging, 

involving obstacles and human groups exhibiting different behaviors. For the Talking activity class, PISHYAR 

successfully guided the user in all three trials, maintaining proper social distance and etiquette. For the Waiting 

activity class (including Queuing ), the system successfully navigated in 2 out of 3 trials; while in one trial, it 

mistakenly classified the activity as walking. In this case, since the system awaited the group to leave, the misclassification led to a temporary halt in navigation. For the Walking activity class, the system performed 

satisfactorily in 2 out of 3 trials, but in one trial, misclassification of the collective activity caused a collision with 

people in the path. Overall, out of 9 trials in this scenario, 7 were fully successful, corresponding to the estimated 

accuracy of 78% . This performance is considered acceptable given the complex and dynamic social conditions. 

The average time per trial was approximately 35 seconds, slightly longer due to the complexity and multi -layered 

processing required.  Fig. 12  summarizes th e overall performance of the proposed system across all evaluation 

scenarios. This figure reflects the accuracy of reaching the target, avoiding obstacles, and maintaining social 

etiquette, clearly highlighting the strengths and limitations of the system u nder practical and real -world 

conditions.   

> Fig. 12 Summary of PISHYAR performance across all real -world evaluation scenarios, including obstacle avoidance, target
> reaching, and compliance with social navigation constraints.

The above results indicate that the proposed social navigation system on PISHYAR , despite certain limitations, 

has demonstrated acceptable performance in real -world environments with complex human conditions. The overall 

accuracy of the system across all evaluations was ~ 80% . Observed errors were mainly due to limited camera field of 

vi ew, IMU sensor inaccuracies, and the lack of a comprehensive environmental map, which can be minimized through 

hardware improvements, enhanced positioning algorithms, and modifications to the navigation method. Additionally, 

the system’s capability to dete ct and respect social etiquette, such as maintaining appropriate distance from human 

groups, highlights the innovation and practical applicability of this research, offering a notable advantage over many 

existing navigation systems. 

To provide a benchmark, the results of the final evaluation in this study were compared with the data reported by 

Agrawal et al. [22 ]. Since social navigation was not addressed in their study or in much of the related literature, a 

direct comparison for social navigation is not possible. However, the primary objective of t heir work (finding an empty 

chair and navigating toward it in the presence of static obstacles ) is closely aligned with the goals of this research, 

making it suitable for comparison. In addition to proximity, their criteria for selecting an empty chair als o considered social aspects such as privacy, comfort, and social distance. The key difference is that in Agrawal et al.’s study, the 

social element was only incorporated in the chair selection process, not in the navigation itself. Their study conducted 

ev aluations across 12 scenarios, with obstacles randomly placed in different positions and the goal being to reach a 

socially and spatially optimal chair without collisions. Their results showed that the system successfully achieved its 

objective in 10 out o f 12 scenarios, corresponding to an overall accuracy of 83.3%. 

This accuracy is comparable to the ~80% achieved in the present study, and the slight difference can be attributed 

to the added complexity of social navigation in this research. Social navigati on introduces additional challenges 

compared to standard navigation with only static obstacles. It is also noteworthy that in scenarios involving only static 

obstacles, PISHYAR developed in this study successfully reached the target in all three trials, de monstrating full 

reliability under simpler conditions. 

6. 2 valuation of M- ased Assistive Interaction 

6. 2.1 User Study Questionnaire Results 

The results of the UTAUT questionnaire in our preliminary exploratory study for eight visually impaired participants 

are shown in  Fig. 13 . All questionnaire items were scored on a five -point Likert scale, with 1 indicating the minimum 

and 5 indicating the maximum score. In general, most items received mean scores of 4 or higher , which indicates a

generally positive perception of PISHYAR among the partici pants. These results suggest a strong level of acceptance 

of the proposed system during our exploratory study which shows us a positive signal of our developed platform .

Similar levels of user acceptance have been reported in recent assistive systems leveraging large language or vision 

language models for visually impaired users, including wearable VLM -based assistants [28 ] and real -time navigation 

aids [31 ].                         

> Fig. 13 Mean participant scores for UTAUT questionnaire items (5 -point Likert scale) evaluating acceptance, usability, trust, and
> perceived sociability of PISHYAR. Error bars indicate standard deviation. AN ATT FC IU PAD PEU PU PE PS SI SP TR
> UTAUT 1.625 44.75 4.125 4.625 4.25 4.625 4.75 4.625 3.625 44.25
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> Participants  Average  Score

# UTAUT Based on the results of our conducted study , t he Anxiety (AN) item received a mean score of 1.625, which 

indicates a relatively low level of anxiety while using PISHYAR. This suggests that during interaction , participants 

generally did not feel afraid of breaking the system. This low anxiety level may indicate that the system was perceived 

as safe and user -friendly. However, the relatively high standard deviation for this item suggests individual differences, 

which may be related to participants’ different levels of familiarity with technology. 

As shown in  Fig. 13 , several items with high mean scores also e xhibited relatively large standard deviations. For 

example, the Intention to Use (IU) item shows that while many participants expressed willingness to use PISHYAR 

again in the future, a smaller number were less inclined to do so. A similar pattern can be o bserved for Perceived Ease 

of Use (PEU), which suggests that although most participants found the system easy to use, some experienced 

difficulties during interaction. These difficulties may be related to system limitations, such as occasional uncertainty 

in responding to user inputs, which is common in LLM -powered interactive systems. The Pearson correlation 

coefficient between Anxiety (AN) and Perceived Ease of Use (PEU) was calculated as -0.97, highlighting a strong 

negative relationship. This result suggests that participants who found PISHYAR easier to use also reported lower 

levels of anxiety during interaction. This correlation is based on a tiny sample size and should not be considered as a 

conclusive s tatistical finding, but rather as an exploratory sign of connection. 

The results for Facilitating Conditions (FC) indicate that participants felt they had sufficient knowledge to use 

PISHYAR. This may be explained by their prior experience with conversatio nal AI systems such as ChatGPT or 

similar voice -based assistants . Based on the Perceived Adaptiveness (PAD) results, participants perceived PISHYAR 

as adaptive to their needs. In the context of this study, this suggests that the developed system and its in tegrated 

modules generally functioned as intended, with only minor malfunctions observed. The results for Perceived 

Enjoyment (PE) indicate that participants experienced enjoyment while using PISHYAR. In addition, the Perceived 

Sociability (PS) item sugges ts that the interaction was perceived as pleasant. Together, these findings highlight 

PISHYAR’s role as a socially intelligent assistive cane that can provide a positive user experience. 

The Trust item received a high score, which shows that participants g enerally perceived PISHYAR as trustworthy. 

Trust is a critical factor in human -robot interaction, particularly for assistive technologies. In contrast, Social Influence 

(SI), Social Presence (SP), and Attitude Toward Technology (AT) received comparatively lower scores than other 

questionnaire items. This suggests that, in its current form, PISHYAR may have a limited impact on users’ social 

experiences or daily social life. However, the Perceived Usefulness (PU) item still received a high score, indicating 

that participants found the system helpful and functional. 

The Pearson correlation coefficient between Intention to Use (IU) and Social Presence (SP) was calculated as 

0.92, indicating a strong positive relationship. Since there were only a few participant s, this correlation should be read 

cautiously and does not suggest that desire to use and perceived social presence are causally related. This result 

suggests that participants who were better able to perceive PISHYAR as a social entity were more likely to express 

willingness to use it again in the future. This finding highlights the importance of sociability and anthropomorphic 

cues in inc reasing long -term acceptance of socially assistive technologies. The strong correlation between perceived 

sociability and intention to use shows prior findings in socially assistive robotics, where anthropomorphic cues and conversational responsiveness wer e shown to directly influence long -term acceptance and trust [11 , 25 ]. Unlike 

systems focusing solely on task efficiency, PISHYAR integrates conversational interaction into a physical mobility 

aid, which may increase the role of social presence in shaping user attitudes. 

Overall, the questionnaire results indicate that PIS HYAR is acceptable as a socially intelligent cane among 

visually impaired users ; however, the observed trends are exploratory and should be validated in future studies with 

larger and more diverse populations . While its social impact is currently limited, the system shows potential to 

influence users’ experiences positively with further improvements in social interaction capabilities. 

6. 2.2 Interaction - evel System Performance 

Across all trials, PISHYAR success fully handled date and time requests as well as general question -and -answer 

commands issued by participants. The system also completed all scene description tasks without failure. 

For object detection tasks involving “chair” and “bottle” detection, each of the eight participants performed both 

tasks, resulting in 16 detection trials in total. The combined VLM -YOLO pipeline successfully detected the target 

object in 15 out of 16 trials, with a single failure occurring in the water bottle detection . However, distance estimation 

in terms of step count for “chairs” was successfully provided in only 4 cases. Failures in distance estimation may be 

attributed to limitations in visual input, such as an incomplete view of the object or incorrect orientation of the ca ne 

relative to the target. 

Interaction logs further indicate that during vision -based tasks, the system was also able to detect additional 

objects on the table, such as apples and cups. These objects were detected either by YOLO or the VLM, with the VLM 

being responsible for most successful detections. This suggests that the vision language model played a significant 

role in providing robust scene understanding beyond predefined object classes. This observation supports findings 

from recent multimodal foundation -model approaches, where VLMs demonstrated superior generalization beyond 

predefined object categories and provided richer scene understanding compared to standalone object detectors [27 ,

32 ]. Such flexibility is particularly valuable in assistive contexts, where the range of relevant objects cannot be 

predefined. 

At the end of each session, participants were encouraged to ask PISHYAR additional questions beyond the 

structured tasks. Example queries included requests for information about the environment, such as “What is on the 

table in front of me?” an d spatial guidance like “Can you tell me what is on my left side?” They also asked general 

knowledge and problem -solving questions, for instance, “What is ten times ten?” and personal advice, such as “My 

mother has a neck and back disc problem , what should I do to help her feel better?”, “What should I do to improve 

my physical strength?”, and “What should I do to improve my studies?” These interactions provided insights into the 

system’s flexibility and participants’ natural use patterns, which demonstrate s its ability to handle unstructured, user -

initiated requests in addition to task -oriented commands. 

In contrast to robot -assisted platforms that rely on external computation or large mobile bases [30 ], PISHYAR 

demonstrates that multimodal LLM -based interaction can be effectively embedded within a lightweight cane -based 

form factor, albeit with trade -offs in sensing coverage and depth robu stness. Overall, the interaction -level results indicate that integrating LLMs and VLMs into a smart cane enables reliable 

conversational assistance and flexible scene understanding, while remaining constrained by camera viewpoint and 

sensing limitations. PISHYAR highlights both its useful potential and areas for further development by achieving a 

balance between portability and interaction richness as compared to prior wearable or robot -based systems. 

7 imitations and Future Work 

This study faces several limitations related to sensing, navigation, interaction, and evaluation. In the social navigation 

component, one of the main limitations is the lack of a n environmental map. The system relies solely on the RGB -D

camera and IMU, which may reduce rob ustness in crowded or highly dynamic environments. This design choice was 

made to preserve real -time performance and to avoid requiring complex user movements during navigation. In 

addition, financial constraints prevented the use of high -cost sensors such as LiDAR. Furthermore, the COMPOSER -

based group activity recognition model is limited to detecting a maximum of two human groups with up to 13 

individuals in total. As a result, in dense crowds, the system may not fully capture all social interactions or enforce 

social navigation rules effectively. 

Another limitation is related to the interaction module. Audio -based interaction, which depends on speech 

recognition and KWS, is sensitive to environmental noise , which could potentially affect recognition accu racy . In 

addition, the interaction mode routing mechanism, while effective in reducing computational load and power 

consumption, may introduce minor delays due to mode switching. This represents a trade -off between responsiveness 

and efficiency that is com mon in embedded assistive systems. 

From an object perception perspective, the object detection and distance estimation module occasionally fail to 

detect certain obstacles. Since the YOLOv8 model trained on the COCO dataset was used, object recognition is limited 

to the 80 predefined classes in this dataset. Consequently, uncommon obstacles may not be detected reliably. 

Moreover, distance estimation accuracy depends on depth sensor data and may degrade under challenging lighting .

Finally, evaluation -related limitations should be noted. The relatively small size of the visually impaired 

population and the fact that all participants in the study were male may limit the generalizability of the findings across 

broader user groups with different gender, age group s, and cultural contexts . In addition, collective activity recognition 

is performed only at the beginning of navigation, assuming that no new human groups enter the environment during 

movement, which may limit system responsiveness in highly dynamic social settings. 

Future work will focus on addressing these limitations through both hardware and algorithmic improvements. 

Planned extensions include the integration of advanced sensors such as LiDAR or higher -resolution depth cameras to 

improve perceptio n accuracy, as well as the adoption of SLAM -based mapping and navigation to enable more reliable 

operation in dynamic and complex environments. The system will be extended to larger indoor spaces settings to 

increase its practical applicability. In additio n, future versions will enhance multimodal feedback by combining both 

haptic and auditory cues, and improve user interaction through more user -friendly interfaces and organized instruction 

for users. On the interaction side, more robust STT and KWS models will be explored to increase reliability in noisy environments. From an evaluation perspective, future studies will involve a larger and more diverse participant group 

to improve generalizability. Furthermore, object detection performance can be improved by incorporating alternative 

detection models or segmentation -based approaches. Finally, future work will explore deeper integration of LLM - and 

VLM -based navigation using additional contextual inputs such as map information, as well as OCR or VLM -based 

tex t reading to support richer environmental understanding. 

8 Conclusion 

In this study, we designed and developed PISHYAR, a socially intelligent smart cane that combines socially aware 

navigation with multimodal LLM -based interaction to support both mobility and interactive assistance for visually 

impaired individuals in indoor environments. The system integrates three core components: (1) a hardware platform, 

including an OAK -D Lite RGB -D camera, a Raspberry Pi 5, and a modified white cane with a 3D -printed structure, 

three vibration motors for haptic feedback, and a power supply module; (2) a socially aware navigation framework 

that utilizes YOLOv8 for object detection, the D* Lite algorithm for path planning, and the COMPOSER  transformer 

model for collecti ve human activity recognition; and (3) an agentic LLM -VLM interaction framework that allows 

voice -based interaction, scene description, and object localization through GPT -4o, plus keyword spotting, speech -to -

text, and text -to -speech modules. 

The socially aware navigation component was evaluated through simulation and real -world experiments to 

measure its ability to guide users safely and respecting social etiquette at the same time . Across all navigation 

scenarios, the system achieved an overall success rate of approximately 80%. The system successfully combines 

obstacle avoidance, dynamic re -planning, and social compliance. In environments with only static obstacles, the cane 

achieved a 100% success rate, demonstrating stable baseline navigation. When target seats became occupied during 

movement, the system correctly re -planned in most cases, with failures primarily caused by the limited camera field 

of view and IMU drift. In socially dynamic scenarios involving walking, talking, and waiting group s, this system 

achieved seven out of nine successful trials by maintaining the proper interpersonal distance and modifying its 

behavior accordingly. These findings suggest that integration of the COMPOSER model enabled reliable recognition 

of collective hu man activities, with 85% accuracy in real -world tests. Overall, the results confirm that incorporating 

group activity awareness significantly enhances navigation quality compared to purely obstacle -based approaches. 

The agentic LLM -based interaction framew ork was evaluated through structured user studies with visually 

impaired participants for measuring usability, acceptance, intention to use, trust, perceived usefulness, and socially 

relevant factors such as sociability and social presence. The system demo nstrated stable and reliable performance in 

voice -based interaction, with all time/date queries and general conversational requests completed successfully. Scene 

description tasks were executed correctly in every trial, which indicates strong multimodal un derstanding. For object 

detection commands, the system correctly identified target objects in 15 out of 16 cases. However, distance estimation 

was only accurate in half of the trials, with errors mainly due to incomplete visual framing or cane misorientati on. We 

have also performed a preliminary study for eight visually impaired participants using our developed social robot. 

Questionnaire results based on the UTAUT model revealed high user acceptance and strong perceptions of usefulness, trust, and sociabil ity. Participants reported that PISHYAR was enjoyable to use during our experiments . Additionally, 

intention to reuse the system correlated strongly with perceived social presence. These findings suggest that the agentic 

interaction framework effectively s upports natural and engaging assistance, while highlighting the need for improved 

spatial grounding and distance estimation in future iterations. 

Overall, these results demonstrate that PISHYAR can effectively combine socially aware navigation and 

multimod al human -robot interaction to provide a user -friendly smart cane. The system provides visually impaired 

users with independent mobility in complex and socially dynamic contexts and provides the foundation for future 

works  to integrate multimodal perception , navigation, and conversational AI into portable assistive devices. 

Acknowledgment 

This work is based upon research funded by the Sharif University of Technology. We would like to express our 

gratitude to our friend s at the Social and Cognitive Robotics Laboratory . for cooperation and helps with the data 

collection, as well as all the participants . We would like to offer special thank s to Dr. Dezhan, Dr. Shirmohammadi ,

Mr. Asadi and the staff of Shahid Moheebi high -school for their cooperation during our experimental study .

Statements eclarations 

Conflict of interest 

Author Alireza Taheri has received a research grant from the Sharif University of Technology . The author s Mahdi 

Haghighat Joo and Maryam Karimi Jafari declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

Availability of data and material data transparency 

All data from this project (the cane design files , codes, photos, videos , etc.) are available in the Social and Cognitive 

Robotics Laboratory archive. 

Code availability 

All of the codes are available in the archive of the Social and Cognitive Robotics Laboratory. In case the readers 

need the codes, they may contact the corr esponding author. 

Authors’ contributions All authors contributed to the study's conception and design. Material preparation, data collection, and analysis were 

performed by Mahdi Haghighat Joo and Maryam Karimi Jafari . Alireza Taheri supervised this research. The first draft 

of the manuscript was written by Mahdi Haghighat Joo and Maryam Karimi Jafari ; and all authors commented on 

previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 

Consent to participate 

Informed consent was obtained from all individual partic ipants included in the study. 

Appendix 

This appendix summarizes the prompts used in the proposed multimodal LLM -based interaction framework. The table 

presents the prompts employed by the LLM, the VLM, and the interaction routing module. The second column lists 

the prompt content, where System Instruction refers to the system -level prompt defining the model’s role and 

be havior, and User Input corresponds to the user -role messages provided to the model during runtime, as defined in 

the OpenAI API message structure. The third column includes representative examples selected from experimental 

tests to illustrate how the prom pts are instantiated in practice. 

Task  Prompt Template  Few -Shot xamples 

Interaction 

Mode Router 

IMR 

system instruction: You are a mode selector for a cane 

assistant. Decide if the user intent REQUIRES the 

camera/vision tools now. 

Return STRICT JSON with: 

{"mode": "VISION" | "VOICE"} 

Rules: 

- Use "VISION" when the user asks about surroundings, 

people, objects, distances, obstacles, navigation, or anything 

needing the live camera. 

- Use "VOICE" for date/time, chit -chat, general Q&A 

without current visu al info. 

- Be conservative: if camera is not clearly needed, pick 

"VOICE". 

user input: (the output of the STT is sent as the input) 

Input: 

بطری آب را پیدا کن. 

utput: 

{"mode": "VISION"} 

Input: 

امروز چند شنبه است؟ 

utput: 

{"mode": "VOICE"} 

Vision Task 

Router 

VTR 

system instruction: You are a routing controller for a 

multimodal cane assistant. Decide which TOOL to call based 

ONLY on the user's latest utterance. 

TOOLS: 

- SCENE: Use ONLY the VLM scene description (no object 

detector). Choose this wh en the user asks about surroundings 

/where they are/what's around/people/crowds/caution areas, 

or generally needs situational awareness. 

- OBJECT: Use BOTH the VLM scene description AND the 

object detector. Choose this when the user asks to 

find/locate/ide ntify a specific object or asks about nearby 

objects in general. If the user mentions a specific object (e.g., 

"cup", "empty chair", "phone"), extract it into `target`. If not, 

set `target` to null. 

Return a STRICT JSON object with exactly these keys: 

Input: 

می تونی بگی که جلوی من چیه؟ 

utput: 

{

"action": "SCENE", 

"target": None 

}

Input: 

صندلی رو برام پیدا کن. 

utput: 

{

"action": "OBJECT", {

"action": "SCENE" | "OBJECT", 

"target": "<string or null>" 

}

No extra text. No explanations. JSON only. 

user input: (the output of the STT is sent as the input) 

"target": "chair" 

}

M

system instruction: You are an interactive conversational 

assistant named 'Pishyār' (Persian:  پیشیار ), a friendly 

companion for the user. Introduce yourself briefly when 

appropriate, and speak with a warm and respectful tone. You 

may occasionally add a tiny touch of light hum or or 

playfulness, but always stay concise and supportive. Avoid 

unnecessary complexity, extra commentary, or directly 

mentioning blindness unless the user explicitly does. Focus 

only on practical help and clear guidance in your responses, 

like a supportiv e friend. 

user input: 

You are a friendly and helpful companion for the user. 

Environmental information and text detected on signs: 

{the VLM output} 

The user has asked: 

{the STT output} 

Please provide a short, warm, fluent, and direct response in 

Persian. Do not start with greetings such as “hello” unless the 

user has greeted first. If text on a sign or board is detected, 

state it clearly and include it in the response if it helps with 

orientation or navigation. If distance information or the 

number of ste ps to nearby objects is available, be sure to 

include it so the user knows how far away objects are. Avoid 

unnecessary details, extra explanations, or any reference to 

the user being visually impaired. 

Input: 

You are a friendly and helpful companion for 

the user. Environmental information and text 

detected on signs: 

{

توصیف صحنه: اتاقی با چیدمان ساده مشاهده می شود. در 

سمت چپ تصویر، بخشی از یک میز چوبی با یک بطری آب 

روی آن قرار دارد. دو صندلی با پشتی چوبی در نزدیکی میز 

دیده می شوند که به دیوا ر متصل شده اند. پرده های نازک بر 

روی پنجره ای که قسمت باالی تصویر را اشغال کرده، آویخته 

شده اند و مقداری نور از آن عبور می کند. در کنار صندلی ها، 

شوفاژ دیواری قرار دارد .

متن قابل خواندن روی تابلوها دیده نشد .

اشیای اطراف: 

chair:  حدود ۴قدم  | table:  حدود ۲قدم 

جست وجو برای « chair »: پیدا شد 

}

The user has asked: 

{صندلی رو برام پیدا کن.} 

Please provide a short, warm, fluent, and 

direct response in Persian. Do not start with 

greetings such as “hello” unless the user has 

greeted first. If text on a sign or board is 

detected, state it clearly and include it in the 

response if it helps with orientation or 

navigation. If distance information or the 

number of steps to nearby objects is available, 

be sure to include it so the user knows how far 

away objects are. Avoid unnecessary details, 

extra explanations, or any reference to the 

user being visually impaired. 

utput: 

صندلی ها  ً حدودا چهار قدم با تو فاصله دارند ودر نزدیکی میز 

چوبی قرار گرفته اند .امیدوارم این اطالعات کمکت کند !

V M

Text Prompt: Look at the image and do TWO things: 

1) Scene (Persian): Give a clear, natural Persian description 

(60 –120 words) focusing on environment, key 

objects/people/actions, relative positions, movements, and 

useful distances. Do NOT mention colors. 

2) OCR (fa/en): Extract all visible Persian or English 

sign/label/place -name text. 

Return your answer in EXACTLY this template: 

Scene: 

<scene description in Persian> 

Texts: 

- <lang:fa|en> «{exact text}» 

Visual Input: 

utput: 

Scene: If there is no text, write:   

> Texts:
> -none
> Visual Input:
> (An RGB image captured by the cane -mounted camera and
> provided to the model)
> در ا ینتصو یر، اتاق یساده د یده میشود . در سمت چپ، م یز
> چوب یکوچک با سطح یصاف وجود دارد که رو یآن یک
> بطر یآب پالست یکیویکفنجان قرار گرفته اند. در م یانه ی
> تصو یر، دو صندل یچوب یبا پا یهها یفلز یکنار هم در برابر
> دیوار یبا راد یاتور قرار گرفته اند. پرده ها یی در باال نصب شده اند
> که جلو یپنجره ایبزرگ را گرفته اند و نور از ا ینپنجره ها به
> داخل اتاق م یتابد .
> Texts:
> -none

References 

1.  Lee W, Ryu S, Park G, et al (2025) Mobile robot design with linkage -based reaction wheel mechanism for 

horizontal –vertical force transmission. Intel Serv Robotics 18:1089 –1101.  https://do i.org/10.1007/s11370 -025 -

00644 -8

2.  Pan H, Cai Y, Jia B, et al (2025) Improving the absolute positioning accuracy of industrial robots based on OP -

ELM and an enhanced backtracking search algorithm. Intel Serv Robotics 18: 247 –260. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11370 -024 -00581 -y

3.  Cauli N, Reforgiato Recupero D (2025) Dr.VCoach: employment of advanced deep learning and human –robot 

interact ion for virtual coaching. Intel Serv Robotics 18:613 –629.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11370 -025 -00603 -3

4.  Taheri A, Meghdari A, Alemi M, Pouretemad H (2018) Human –Robot Interaction in Autism Treatment: A Case 

Study on Three Pairs of Autistic Children as Twins, Siblings, and Classmates. Int J of Soc Robotics 10:93 –113. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369 -017 -0433 -8

5.  Taheri A, Meghdari A, Mahoor MH (2021) A Close Look at the Imitation Performance of Children with Autism 

and Typically Developing Children Using a Robotic System. Int J of Soc Robotics 13:1125 –1147. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369 -020 -00704 -2

6.  Basiri S, Taheri A, Meghdari AF, et al (2023) Dynamic Iranian Sign Language Recogni tion Using an Optimized 

Deep Neural Network: An Implementation via a Robotic -Based Architecture. Int J of Soc Robotics 15:599 –619. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369 -021 -00819 -0

7.  Esfandbod A, Nourbala A, Rokhi Z, et al (2024) Design, Manufacture, and Acceptance Evaluation of APO: A 

Lip -syncing Social Robot Developed for Lip -reading Training Programs. Int J of Soc Robotics 16:1151 –1165. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369 -022 -00933 -7

8.  WHO (2023) Blindness and Vision Impairment.  https://www.who. int/news -room/fact -sheets/detail/blindness -

and -visual -impairment . Accessed 10 Aug 2023. 

9.  Elmannai W, Elleithy K (2017) Sensor -Based Assistive Devices for Visually -Impaired People: Current Status, 

Challenges, and Future Dir ections. Sensors 17:565.  https://doi.org/10.3390/s17030565 

10.  Khanom M, Sadi MS, Islam MdM (2019) A Comparative Study of Walking Assistance Tools Developed for the 

Visually Impaired People. In: 2019 1st International Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering and Robotics Tec hnology (ICASERT). IEEE, Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp 1 –5. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASERT.2019.8934566 

11.  Wei Y, Rocher N, Gupta C, et al (2025) Human Robot Interaction for Blind and Low Vision People: A 

Systematic Literature Review. In: Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems. ACM, Yokohama Japan, pp 1 –19.  https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3706598.3713438 

12.  Kuzdeuov A, Mukayev O, Nurgaliyev S, et al (2024) ChatGPT for Visually Impaired and Blind. In: 2024 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC). pp 722 –727. 

https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.22047080.v2 

13.  Zafar S, Asif M, Ahmad MB, et al (2022) Assistive Devices Analysis for Visually Impaired Persons: A Review 

on Taxonomy. IEEE Access 10:13354 –13366.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3146728 

14.  Masud U, Saeed T, Malaikah HM, et al (2022) Smart Assistive System for Visu ally Impaired People 

Obstruction Avoidance Through Object Detection and Classification. IEEE Access 10:13428 –13441. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3146320 

15.  Alashjaee AM, AlEisa HN, Darem AA, Marzouk R (2025) A hybrid object detection approach for visually 

impaired persons using pigeon -inspired optimization and deep learning models. Sci Rep 15:9688. 

http s://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -025 -92239 -7

16.  Bauer Z, Dominguez A, Cruz E, et al (2020) Enhancing perception for the visually impaired with deep learning 

techniques and low -cost wearable sensors. Pattern Recognition Letters 1 37:27 –36. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2019.03.008 

17.  S MD, Niveditha G, Pinto NA, Sinha S (2024) Enhancing Mobility: A Smart Cane with Integrated Navigation 

System and Voice -Assisted Guidance for the Visually Impaired. In: 2024 IEEE 13th International Conference 

on Communication Systems and Network Technolog ies (CSNT). pp 1124 –1129. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CSNT60213.2024.10546111 

18.  Abdusalomov AB, Mukhiddinov M, Kutlimuratov A, Whangbo TK (2022) Improved Real -Tim e Fire Warning 

System Based on Advanced Technologies for Visually Impaired People. Sensors 22:7305. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/s22197305 

19.  Dang B, Ma D, Li S, et al (2024) Enh ancing Kitchen Independence: Deep Learning -Based Object Detection for 

Visually Impaired Assistance. AJST 9:180 –184.  https://doi.org/10.54097/hc3f1045 

20.  Slade P, Tambe A, Ko chenderfer MJ (2021) Multimodal sensing and intuitive steering assistance improve 

navigation and mobility for people with impaired vision. Sci Robot 6:eabg6594. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.a bg6594 

21.  Feltner C, Guilbe J, Zehtabian S, et al (2019) Smart Walker for the Visually Impaired. In: ICC 2019 - 2019 

IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). pp 1 –6.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2019.8762081 

22.  Agrawal S, West ME, Hayes B (2022) A Novel Perceptive Robotic Cane with Haptic Navigation for Enabling 

Vision -Independent Participation in the Social Dynamics of Se at Choice. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International 

Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp 9156 –9163. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS47612.2022.9981219 23.  Mai C, Chen H, Zeng L, et al (2024) A Smart Cane Based on 2D LiDAR and RGB -D Camera Sensor -Realizing 

Navigation and Obstacle Recognition. Sensors 24:870.  https://doi.org/10.3390/s24030870 

24.  Wang H -C, Katzschmann RK, Teng S, et al (2017) Enabling independent navigation for visually impaired 

people through a wearable vision -based feedback system. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics 

and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, S ingapore, Singapore, pp 6533 –6540. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989772 

25.  Merchant Z, Anwar A, Wang E, et al (2024) Generating Contextually -Relevant Navigation Instructions for 

Blind and Low Vision People.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv .2407.08219 

26.  Hwang H, Kwon S, Kim Y, Kim D (2024) Is It Safe to Cross? Interpretable Risk Assessment with GPT -4V for 

Safety -Aware Street Crossing. In: 2024 21st International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR). pp 281 –288. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/UR61395.2024.10597464 

27.  Zhang Z, Sun Z, Zhang Z, et al (2025) “I Can See Forever!”: Evaluating Real -time VideoLLMs for Assisting 

Ind ividuals with Visual Impairments.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.04488 

28.  Mahboob Z, Sadiq S, Khan US, et al (2024) MASA: Multi Agent Situational Awareness for Visually Impaired. 

In: 2024 21st International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology (IBCAST). pp 349 –354. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/IBCAST61650.2024.10877205 

29.  Sachin A, Penukonda A, Naveen M, et al (2025) NAVISIGHT: A Deep Learning and Voice -Assisted System for 

Intelligent Indoor Navigation of the Visually Impaired. In: 2025 3rd International Conference on Inventive 

Computing and Informatics (I CICI). pp 848 –854.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICI65870.2025.11069837 

30.  Nevasekar V, Cabrera ME (2025) Seeing Eye Stretch: Robot -assisted Indoor Navigation for Blind or Low -

Vision Individuals. In: 2025 22nd International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR). pp 518 –522. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/UR65550.2025.11078138 

31.  Da s D, Das AD, Sadaf F, et al (2025) Real -Time Assistive Navigation for the Visually Impaired: A Scalable 

Approach for Indoor and Outdoor Mobility.  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.20976 

32.  Hao Y, Yang F, Huang H, et al (2024) A Multi -Modal Foundation Model to Assist People with Blindness and 

Low Vision in Environmental Interaction. J Imaging 10:103.  https://doi.org/10.3390/jimaging100501 03 

33.  Terven J, Córdova -Esparza D -M, Romero -González J -A (2023) A Comprehensive Review of YOLO 

Architectures in Computer Vision: From YOLOv1 to YOLOv8 and YOLO -NAS. MAKE 5:1680 –1716. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/make5040083 

34.  Koenig S, Likhachev M (2005) Fast replanning for navigation in unknown terrain. IEEE Trans Robot 21:354 –

363.  https://d oi.org/10.1109/TRO.2004.838026 

35.  Choi W, Shahid K, Savarese S (2009) What are they doing? : Collective activity classification using spatio -

temporal relationship among people. In: 2009 IEEE 12th International Conference o n Computer Vision 

Workshops, ICCV Workshops. pp 1282 –1289.  https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2009.5457461 

36.  Zhou H, Kadav A, Shamsian A, et al (2022) COMPOSER: Composit ional Reasoning of Group Activity in 

Videos with Keypoint -Only Modality. In: Avidan S, Brostow G, Cissé M, et al (eds) Computer Vision – ECCV 

2022. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, pp 249 –266.  ht tps://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -19833 -5_15 37.  Lugaresi C, Tang J, Nash H, et al (2019) MediaPipe: A Framework for Building Perception Pipelines. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.08172 

38.  Michel O (2004) Cyberbotics Ltd. WebotsTM : Professional Mobile Robot Simulation. International Journal of 

Advanced Robotic Systems 1:5.  https://doi.org/10.5772/5618 

39.  Venkatesh V, Morris MG, Davis GB, Davis FD (2003) User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward A 

Unified View1. MIS Quarterly 27:425 –478.  https://doi.org/10.2307/30036540