Title: AIC CTU@AVerImaTeC: dual-retriever RAG for image-text fact checking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.15190v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Feb 2026 01:10:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# AIC CTU@AVerImaTeC: dual-retriever RAG for image-text fact checking 

Herbert Ullrich 

AI Center @ CTU FEE Charles Square 13 Prague, Czech Republic 

ullriher@fel.cvut.cz 

Jan Drchal 

AI Center @ CTU FEE Charles Square 13 Prague, Czech Republic 

drchajan@fel.cvut.cz 

Abstract 

In this paper, we present our 3rd place system in the AVerImaTeC shared task, which com-bines our last year’s retrieval-augmented gen-eration (RAG) pipeline with a reverse image search (RIS) module. Despite its simplicity, our system delivers competitive performance with a single multimodal LLM call per fact-check at just $0.013 on average using GPT5.1 via OpenAI Batch API. Our system is also easy to reproduce and tweak, consisting of only three decoupled modules – a textual retrieval module based on similarity search, an image retrieval module based on API-accessed RIS, and a gen-eration module using GPT5.1 – which is why we suggest it as an accesible starting point for further experimentation. We publish its code 1

and prompts, as well as our vector stores and insights into the scheme’s running costs and directions for further improvement. 

1 Introduction 

The challenge of automated fact verification has been studied extensively in previous works (Guo et al., 2022; Akhtar et al., 2025; Schlichtkrull et al., 2024), most commonly modelled as an NLP task with textual inputs. With public discourse moving increasingly to social media, the task fact-checkers face, however, often goes beyond just text and lan-guage. An important example of this phenomenon are the image-text claims, whose veracity depends not only on the textual statement itself, but also on the contents of images that come with it, whether they are authentic or edited, and whether the im-ages are presented in the right context. To facilitate the automation of this type of fact-checking, Cao et al. 2025 publishes the AVerI-maTeC dataset, collecting hundreds of reference image-text factchecks from human annotators, an-nouncing the AVerImaTeC shared task late 2025, to establish its state of the art. 

> 1

https://github.com/heruberuto/AVerImaTec_ Shared_Task Claim te xt        

> Embedding
> (mxbai-embed-larg e-v1)
> KNN  Retriev al
> MMR  Reranking
> Vector Store
> (F aiss)
> Label con|dences
> Question Answer
> Question Answer
> Evidence
> Question Answer
> Question  Answer
> Con}icting  ev/Cherrypicking
> Not  Enough  Evidence
> Supported
> Refuted
> Sy stem Prompt
> Softmax  on Lik ert  Scores
> LLM
> (gpt5.1)
> few-shot  submodule
> (optional)
> JSON  Output Parsing
> BM25  Example choice
> Few-shot Examples
> AVerIma TeC
> Train  Set
> each  QA pair  also  ref ers  a source
> Claim imag es
> RIS  search
> (g oogle  lens )
> url url url
> RIS  results
> Scraping
> (Firecrawl)
> Text -related
> sources
> Imag e-related
> sources Evidence &label generator
> Imag e-based  retriev er
> te xt  only
> te xt
> &
> thumb
> Text  retriev er  (o{ine)
> AVerIma TeC
> o{ine knowledg e

Figure 1: Our image-text fact-checking pipeline used in CTU AIC AVerImaTeC submission, adapted from Ullrich and Drchal 2025. System is described in detail in section 2. 

With this paper, we introduce our 3rd place AVer-ImaTeC shared-task system, aiming to provide a strong baseline for image-text fact checking with easy-to-reimplement modules and affordable run-ning costs. We use a single query to a multimodal LLM per claim and a single RIS request for each attached image. Our pipeline performs retrieval-

> arXiv:2602.15190v1 [cs.CL] 16 Feb 2026

augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020) with two retrieval modules: one retrieves relevant documents from offline knowledge using vector search, and the other retrieves documents that con-textualize the claim images using RIS (Google Lens in our case). Our system is visualised in figure 1 and detailed in section 2. 

2 System description 

We adapted a system from Ullrich and Drchal 2025 which extends on top of Ullrich et al. 2024. The cited papers describe the system in detail, with ablation studies and justifications of each step. Our pipeline, depicted in Figure 1, is a RAG scheme of two retrievers and one generation module: i. Text-based retrieval module 

1. Vector store is produced for each of the AVerImaTeC datapoints in advance, using the scheme introduced in Ull-rich et al. 2024: the provided text-only 2 AVerImaTeC knowledge store is chunked into 2048-character seg-ments 3, and each is embedded using the mxbai-embed-large-v1 (Li and Li, 2024; Lee et al., 2024) model. 2. Similarity search is performed using the exact k-NN search implementation pro-vided by the FAISS (Douze et al., 2024; Johnson et al., 2019) library, with k = 20 

nearest neighbours 3. Maximal marginal relevance (Car-bonell and Goldstein, 1998) reranking down to l = 7 results is then applied to diversify the search results. We set the tradeoff between result diversity and sim-ilarity to the claim to λ = 0 .8 in favour of similarity to the claim. ii. Image-based retrieval module is invoked separately for each image attached to the AVer-ImaTeC claim – that means, if claim contains 

n images, n separate sets of results will be produced 

> 2AVerImaTeC set also includes image-text and image-only knowledge stores, but since these were (as of Feb 2026) not marked with a source URL or other real-world identifier, we dropped these as inappropriate to be referred to as sources.
> 3The chunks do not overlap, and are annotated with context before and after in their metadata, as described in more detail in Ullrich et al. 2024.

1. Reverse image search (RIS) is per-formed using the Google Lens 4 via Ser-per API 5 to produce a set of (up to 30) RIS results – each assigned a webpage URL and a thumbnail , which contains an image within this webpage similar to the given claim image – this should be the image that triggered webpage’s inclusion in RIS results. 2. Scraping : each of the RIS results is then scraped, in our case, using the Firecrawl API 6, which produces a LLM-friendly markdown for each of the URLs. We dis-regard the other images in the webpage, and only keep the thumbnail which trig-gered the RIS result inclusion, as it has stronger guarantees of being similar to the claim image. 3. Result filtering – to maintain the evi-dence principle (Glockner et al., 2022), we filter out any evidence published af-ter the claim was originally stated, using the Htmldate (Barbaresi, 2020) library to estimate the publishment dates for each RIS-retrieved URL. Importantly, many results of RIS we per-formed in ii.1 were scraping-protected, most notably the Facebook and Insta-gram posts, resulting in an empty result. For simplicity and compliance with fair data usage, we toss these results as well, although we acknowledge that this might lead to a loss of useful information. Finally, to be able to mark the results with a single-digit identifier (iii.1) and to not clutter the generation prompt, we only preserve the first 9 of the remaining results. iii. Evidence, label, and justification genera-tion module 

1. System prompt is composed of the re-sults of both the text- (i.) and image-based (ii.) retrievers – in the prompt, as well as in the pipeline scheme in Fig-ure 1, we refer to them as to text-related sources and image-related sources , re-spectively. We instruct the LLM to cite 

> 4https://lens.google.com/
> 5https://serper.dev/
> 6https://firecrawl.dev/

a source with each piece of evidence it produces, assigning the sources numeri-cal source ID s: 1–9 for the text-related sources and 11–19 for the sources related to the 1st claim image, 21–29 for the sources related to the 2nd claim image, etc. For the image sources, we only in-clude their text and an information that this text was published alongside an im-age similar to i-th claim image (notably omitting the thumbnail itself), in order not to overwhelm the multimodal LLM with easy-to-confuse image inputs. These sources, as well as the task descrip-tion, formatting instructions and few-shot examples (iii.2) are then serialized into a single system prompt – its full text can be found in Appendix A 2. Few-shot examples of evidence are retrieved for the given claim using BM25 (Robertson et al., 1995) on AVerI-maTeC train set. The evidence examples are then appended to the system prompt (iii.1) to make the LLM adhere better to the evidence format used by AVerI-maTeC annotators. 3. Multimodal user message is composed of the claim text in its first field, and a base64-encoded claim images in its sub-sequent fields. The user message is then passed to the LLM to generate evidence, label and justification. 4. Upon parsing the LLM outputs, we augment the LLM-generated evidence which refer an image-related source with a base64-encoded thumbnail (ii.1) of the respective image-related source to facili-tatate comparison with evidence images chosen by human annotators. 5. AVerImaTeC format matching – as in previous years, our system outputs the evidence formatted as QA pairs. In AVer-ImaTeC, however, this format is phased out – while the questions are evaluated separately, the main score (see table 1) is now based on comparing two self-contained “evidence texts”, typically con-taining all the information within a single declarative sentence with pointers to rel-evant images. To match this design without introduc-ing another LLM request, we concate-nate the question and answer to obtain a self-contained evidence text for each QA pair. If an image source from RIS was referred, we append [IMG_1] , referring source thumbnail, to this evidence text. The system extends on top of our previous work on the AVeriTeC and AVeriTeC 2 shared tasks (Ull-rich et al., 2024; Ullrich and Drchal, 2025), with the most notable addition of the image-based retrieval module (ii). 

3 Results and analysis  

> System Question Score Evidence Score Verdict Accuracy Justification Score
> HUMANE

0.89 0.54 0.55 0.56  

> ADA-AGGR

0.37 0.46 0.54 0.43  

> AIC CTU (ours)

0.81 0.33 0.35 0.30  

> XxP

0.39 0.27 0.26 0.20  

> teamName

0.66 0.23 0.26 0.22  

> REVEAL

0.63 0.28 0.24 0.13  

> fv

0.29 0.16 0.16 0.13  

> Baseline

0.55 0.17 0.11 0.13  

> Table 1: System leaderboard showing performance met-rics on AVerImaTeC test-split. Our system described in section 2 is highlighted with italics .

The final AVerImaTeC leaderboard is shown in table 1. Our system achieves a combined ver-dict score 7 of 0.35, with a near-SOTA question score of 0.81, mean evidence score of 0.35, and a justification score of 0.3. Metrics are based on Ev2R (Akhtar et al., 2024) recall scores with LLM as a judge. While our system does not reach the very state of the art, it significantly outperforms the iterative agentic baseline (Cao et al., 2025) and majority of other systems across the board, scoring a solid 3rd place. To reveal directions for future improvements, we proceed to study what its main pitfalls are using the leaderboard metrics and our own reproductions of AVerImaTeC dev-split metrics. Evidence format Question Score Evidence Score Verdict Accuracy Justification Score  

> Answer only

0.86 0.27 0.31 0.28  

> Question + Answer

0.84 0.33 0.39 0.31  

> Declarative evidence

0.82 0.35 0.38 0.32 

> Table 2: Ablation study tweaking the evidence gener-ation format from section 2, iii. Scheme used in final submission is in italics.

3.1 Bottlenecks 

Looking at our standing in the leaderboard from table 1, the main bottleneck appears to be our sys-tem’s evidence score , computed using Ev2R re-call. Despite the question score shows promising 81% our lack in evidence score then propagates further to the verdict and justification scores as well. Part of this problem could be attributed to our system’s legacy evidence format geared more towards AVeriTeC 1 and 2 shared tasks – an ev-idence is generated as a QA pair, of a question fact-checker would ask themselves during the task, and an answer they would arrive to, grounded in an URL-referred source, whereas in AVerImaTeC evaluation scheme, the evidence is a self-contained declarative sentence with pointers to relevant im-ages. Table 2 lists three approaches we took to address this discrepancy. In our first approach, we disre-garded it and only listed the generated answers as AVerImaTeC evidence. In our second approach, which is also the one we submitted to the final leaderboard (table 1), we concatenated the question and answer to obtain each evidence string, append-ing a [IMG_1] tag and a base64-encoded image in metadata when an image-related source was used. To see whether this can be improved upon, we have also experimentally implemented a 3rd ap-proach, referred to as “declarative evidence” in ta-ble 2, in which we have directly prompted the LLM to generate a self-contained declarative evidence text with pointers to used images. Although this approach was experimental and not free of its own glitches (resulting in a malformed image pointers and [IMG_1] tag being erroneously used in other   

> 7Proportion of claims with a correct verdict and an evi-dence score of at least 0.3 at the same time, see Cao et al. 2025.

generic fields, such as justification and questions), it shows promissing results, surpassing our Ques-tion+Answer approach by encouraging 2% in the evidence score, even before adjusting its prompt to iron out the glitches. Another bottleneck could be possible discrepan-cies in our image-evidence usage – looking closer at the ablation study in table 2, the “Answer only” approach stays too close behind its more advanced alternatives. This finding raises concerns, since the answer-only approach does not use any [IMG_1] 

tags, yet per Cao et al. 2025, 53.9% of the AVerI-maTeC evidence should be annotated using reverse image search, with 1.6% using the image itself as the answer. This is to be investigated in fu-ture works, as even a small discrepancy in the way our system presents its image sources and how the AVerImaTeC evaluator assumes to receive them may have a tremendous impact on the final score. 

3.2 Cost analysis 

The scheme from section 2 uses a single RIS re-quest per claim image (one claim may feature mul-tiple images, but the vast majority features exactly 1 image in AVerImaTeC). Using Serper, this search comes at a cost of 3 credits, totalling $0.003 with the least-discounted bulk pricing ($50 for 50K Ser-per credits). The markdown scraping was performed using the Firecrawl API, which at its hobby tier charges $0.006 per scraped page, with 20,000 free scraping tasks for education emails. In the worst-case sce-nario of multiple claim images in a single claim, each with 9 RIS results older than the claim date that can be scraped 8 and no discount, this amounts to $0.05 per image. To avoid this cost, however, we suggest using a free scraper instead, such as the Trafilatura library which was used to produce the AVerImaTeC offline knowledge stores and our system does not show any noticeable problems in-gesting its outputs. The Generation module LLM results were com-puted using the OpenAI Batch API, with GPT-5.1 as the backbone model. On average, 11K com-pletion input tokens were given to the model and 1150 tokens of output were generated per AVerI-maTeC claim using our system from section 2, at an average cost of $0.013 per claim. 

> 8Which is not usually the case, as at least some propor-tion of results typically come from Meta’s scraping-protected social media

4 Conclusion 

Using a well established foundational fact-checking framework from (Ullrich et al., 2024; Ull-rich and Drchal, 2025), we introduce a new pipeline for image-text fact-checking using a dual-retrieval multimodal RAG system. The two retrieval mod-ules our system uses are a text-based similarity search and a reverse image search (RIS) accessed through an API. Our system scores 3rd place in the AVerImaTeC shared task, with a combined verdict score of 0.35, a question score of 0.81, an evidence score of 0.35, and a justification score of 0.3, outperforming the baseline across the board. With this paper, we publish a detailed description of our system design, code and prompts we used, as well as insights into the costs of its deployment and possible points of failure. 

4.1 Future works 

1. During our exploratory analysis, we have wit-nessed many pitfalls of the used RIS engine (Google Lens) – often providing 0 results for claims from more distant past (e.g. 2022 for dev set), or for claim images with explicit graphical content – this should be addressed in future works, possibly swapping the RIS provider for a more robust one, as even a sub-optimal or explicit search result may be valu-able for fact-checking and is better facilitated by the RAG strategy than an empty result. 2. The occasional absence of RIS results, com-bined with the fact that not all gold evidence includes image references, motivates an agen-tic extension of our pipeline (Figure 1). An LLM controller could decide whether to use RIS, text retrieval, or both, saving resources when RIS is unlikely to help. 3. Finally, our findings in section 3.1 suggest pos-sible discrepancies between how our system represents image-text evidence and how the AVerImaTeC evaluator expects it. Address-ing this mismatch may improve scores on this benchmark and in future shared tasks derived from it. 

Limitations 

Our pipeline is not meant to be relied upon nor to replace a human fact-checker, but rather to assist an informed user. It gives sources for both the textual and image-text evidence and proposes labels for further questioning. Hallucinations may still ap-pear in the generated justification, and the system is not meant to be used as an oracle. The current prompting and text-retrieval model assume English input, and the MLLM backbone used for the shared task (although interchangeable) is GPT5.1, which is a black box model with limited reproducibility and considerable carbon costs. Our submission also depends on proprietary services for RIS and scraping, further limiting exact reproducibility, and we do not provide a text-only vs. text+RIS ablation to isolate the RIS contribution. The cap of 9 RIS re-sults is a prompt-budget choice that was not tuned. Refuted class is massively overrepresented in the AVerImaTeC dataset (95% of train-claims and 78% of text-claims), making the accuracy-based AVerI-maTeC score computed over AVerImaTeC test set a problematic metric for systems used in the wild. 

Ethics statement 

Our pipeline extends our last-year submission. All original authors agreed with this reuse. The system was built specifically for the AVerImaTeC shared task and reflects the biases of its annotators; for more information, we suggest the original AVerI-maTeC paper (Cao et al., 2025). 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank Tomáš Mlynáˇ r for provid-ing insights into multi-modal retrieval systems. This article was produced with the support of the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic un-der the SIGMA Programme, project TQ01000100 Newsroom AI: public service in the era of au-tomated journalism. The access to the compu-tational infrastructure of the OP VVV funded project CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_019/0000765 “Re-search Center for Informatics” is also gratefully acknowledged. 

References 

> Mubashara Akhtar, Rami Aly, Yulong Chen, Zhenyun Deng, Michael Schlichtkrull, Chenxi Whitehouse, and Andreas Vlachos. 2025. The 2nd automated ver-ification of textual claims (AVeriTeC) shared task: Open-weights, reproducible and efficient systems. In
> Proceedings of the Eighth Fact Extraction and VERi-fication Workshop (FEVER) , pages 201–223, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mubashara Akhtar, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. 2024. Ev2r: Evaluating evidence retrieval in automated fact-checking. Adrien Barbaresi. 2020. htmldate: A Python package to extract publication dates from web pages. Journal of Open Source Software , 5(51):2439. Rui Cao, Zifeng Ding, Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. 2025. Averi-matec: A dataset for automatic verification of image-text claims with evidence from the web. Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The use of mmr, diversity-based reranking for reordering doc-uments and producing summaries. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’98, page 335–336, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. 2024. The faiss library. Max Glockner, Yufang Hou, and Iryna Gurevych. 2022. Missing counter-evidence renders NLP fact-checking unrealistic for misinformation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 5916–5936, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vla-chos. 2022. A survey on automated fact-checking. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:178–206. Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2019. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7(3):535–547. Sean Lee, Aamir Shakir, Darius Koenig, and Julius Lipp. 2024. Open source strikes bread - new fluffy embeddings model. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Xianming Li and Jing Li. 2024. AoE: Angle-optimized embeddings for semantic textual similarity. In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1825–1839, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Stephen Robertson, S. Walker, S. Jones, M. M. Hancock-Beaulieu, and M. Gatford. 1995. Okapi at trec-3. In Overview of the Third Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-3) .Michael Schlichtkrull, Yulong Chen, Chenxi White-house, Zhenyun Deng, Mubashara Akhtar, Rami Aly, Zhijiang Guo, Christos Christodoulopoulos, Oana Cocarascu, Arpit Mittal, James Thorne, and Andreas Vlachos. 2024. The automated verification of textual claims (AVeriTeC) shared task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Fact Extraction and VERification Work-shop (FEVER) , pages 1–26, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Herbert Ullrich and Jan Drchal. 2025. AIC CTU@FEVER 8: On-premise fact checking through long context RAG. In Proceedings of the Eighth Fact Extraction and VERification Workshop (FEVER) ,pages 274–280, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Herbert Ullrich, Tomáš Mlynáˇ r, and Jan Drchal. 2024. AIC CTU system at AVeriTeC: Re-framing auto-mated fact-checking as a simple RAG task. In Pro-ceedings of the Seventh Fact Extraction and VERifi-cation Workshop (FEVER) , pages 137–150, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. A System prompt 

You are a professional fact checker of image - text claims , formulate up to 10 questions that cover all the facts needed to validate whether the factual statement ( in User message ) is true , false , uncertain or a matter of opinion . The claim consists of a textual statement and { image_count } images associated with the claim . The claim was made by { author } on { date } via { medium }. Each question has one of four answer types : Boolean , Extractive , Abstractive and Unanswerable using the provided sources . After formulating Your questions and their answers using the provided sources , You evaluate the possible veracity verdicts ( Supported claim , Refuted claim , Not enough evidence , or Conflicting evidence / Cherrypicking ) given your claim and evidence on a Likert scale (1 - Strongly disagree , 2 - Disagree , 3 - Neutral , 4 -Agree , 5 - Strongly agree ). Ultimately , you note the single likeliest veracity verdict according to your best knowledge . The facts must be coming from the sources listed below . The first {k} sources was retrieved using textual search and the rest was retrieved using reverse image search ( google lens ). The sources are numbered - sources 1 through {k} are related to the claim text , sources 11 -19 were retrieved for the first user image , 21 -29 to the second etc . You may therefore assume that each of the image - based sources was published alongside a picture similar to the respective user image . ---## Source ID : 1 [ url ] [ context before ] [ page content ] [ context after ] ... ---## Image Source ID : 11 ( related to user image 1, Title : [ title ], date :[ page_date ], url : [ url ], image url : [ img_url ]) [ content ] ... ---## Output formatting Please , you MUST only print the output in the following output format : 

``` json {" questions ": [{" question ": "< Your first question >" , " answer ": "< The answer to the Your first question >" , " source ": "< Single numeric source ID backing the answer for Your first question >" , " answer_type ":" < The type of first answer >"} ,... ], " claim_veracity ": {" Supported ": "< Likert - scale rating of how much You agree with the ' Supported '

veracity classification >" , " Refuted ": "< Likert - scale rating of how much You agree with the ' Refuted '

veracity classification >" , " Not Enough Evidence ": "< Likert - scale rating of how much You agree with the 

' Not Enough Evidence ' veracity classification >" , " Conflicting Evidence / Cherrypicking ": "< Likert - scale rating of how much You agree with the ' Conflicting Evidence / Cherrypicking ' veracity classification >" }, " veracity_verdict ": "< The suggested veracity classification for the claim >" , " verdict_justification ": "<A brief justification of the veracity verdict >" }

``` 

---## Few - shot learning You have access to the following few - shot learning examples for questions and answers .: ### Question examples for claim "{ example [" claim "]}" ( verdict { example [" gold_label "]}) " question ": "{ question }" , " answer ": "{ answer }" , " answer_type ": "{ answer_type }" ... 

Listing 1: Our fact-checking system prompt to be used with Multimodal LLM, feeding the AVerImaTeC claim text and images into its multimodal user message. Three dots represent omitted repeating parts of the prompt. Adapted for multimodal scenario from Ullrich and Drchal 2025.