Title: Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal Credit Assignment with Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.17497v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Feb 2026 01:57:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal Credit Assignment with Large Language Models 

Wen-Tse Chen 1 Jiayu Chen 2 Fahim Tajwar 1 Hao Zhu 3 Xintong Duan 1

Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1 Jeff Schneider 11 Carnegie Mellon University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Stanford University 

## Abstract 

Learning from self-sampled data and sparse environmental feedback remains a fundamental challenge in training self-evolving agents. Temporal credit assignment mitigates this issue by transforming sparse feedback into dense supervision signals. However, previous approaches typically depend on learning task-specific value functions for credit assignment, which suffer from poor sample efficiency and limited generalization. In this work, we propose to leverage pretrained knowledge from large language models (LLMs) to transform sparse rewards into dense train-ing signals (i.e., the advantage function) through retrospective in-context learning (RICL). We further propose an online learning framework, RICOL, which itera-tively refines the policy based on the credit assignment results from RICL. We empirically demonstrate that RICL can accurately estimate the advantage function with limited samples and effectively identify critical states in the environment for temporal credit assignment. Extended evaluation on four BabyAI scenarios show that RICOL achieves comparable convergent performance with traditional online RL algorithms with significantly higher sample efficiency. Our findings highlight the potential of leveraging LLMs for temporal credit assignment, paving the way for more sample-efficient and generalizable RL paradigms. 

## 1 Introduction 

Online learning with LLMs, guided by self-generated data and environmental feedback, offers a promising research direction for advancing beyond the constraints of demonstration [Dong et al., 2024]. However, this task is inherently difficult because valuable environmental feedback is often sparse [Andrychowicz et al., 2017, Sukhbaatar et al., 2017]. This challenge is particularly evident in multi-turn settings, where agents must execute a sequence of correct actions to receive a reward signal. Sparse environmental feedback increases both the sample complexity and the instability of the learning process [Chaudhari et al., 2024, Cao et al., 2024]. In this work, we explore effective temporal credit assignment methods to convert sparse feedback into dense training signals based on a creative use of LLMs, enabling the identification of critical states and actions in the environment and facilitating more efficient online learning (of LLM agents). In particular, we adopt LLMs as policies and update them using a novel Retrospective In-Context Learning (RICL) algorithm. RICL is designed specifically for multi-turn setting. At each turn (i.e., environment time step), RICL first analyze environmental feedback (i.e., reward signals) by leveraging the pretrained knowledge of an LLM reflector, then incorporate this analysis into the prompt to perform an in-context update of the LLM policy. Further, we introduce a novel paradigm to estimate the advantage function of an LLM policy by utilizing the log-probabilities of both the original policy and its in-context updated version. This process is theoretically grounded, and our experiments demonstrate that it can accurately estimate the advantage function with high sample efficiency. In this way, we transform sparse reward signals into advantage functions, which are 

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). 

> arXiv:2602.17497v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026

dense training signals facilitating both temporal credit assignment and policy training. These improvements stem from the pretrained knowledge in LLMs and our new approach to estimating advantage functions using LLMs. Further, we introduce RICOL, a novel online learning framework for LLMs that iteratively refines the policy based on the credit assignment results from RICL. Leveraging the accurate credit assignment performed by RICL and the strong generalization ability of LLMs, RICOL is significantly more sample-efficient than traditional online RL methods across multiple language-conditioned, sparse-reward sequential decision-making tasks. This demonstrates the potential of our algorithm to enable LLMs to self-improve through online learning. In summary, our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose RICL for temporal credit assignment, which transforms sparse reward signals into advantage functions by comparing the log-probabilities of LLM policies before and after an in-context update. (2) We propose RICOL, an online learning framework that uses advantage weighted regression to incorporate credit assignment results (i.e., advantage functions) from RICL into the LLMs’ parameters. This integration enables LLM agents to self-improve based on sparse environmental feedback. (3) Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of RICL in temporal credit assignment and the efficacy and efficiency of RICOL in iterative policy improvement. Altogether, RICL and RICOL represent a more sample-efficient and generalizable RL paradigm for LLM agents. 

## 2 Related Works 

Intrinsic Self-Correction : In recent studies, LLMs have demonstrated advanced capabilities in self-verifying generated responses and correcting potential issues through in-context learning [Madaan et al., 2024, Kim et al., 2023]. However, critiques have suggested that intrinsic self-correction, in the absence of ground truth environment feedback, may not always enhance and could potentially degrade performance of LLMs [Huang et al., 2023, Olausson et al., 2023, Valmeekam et al., 2023]. In contrast, our focus is on learning from environmental feedback, a challenging task due to its sparse and complex nature. 

Self-Correction based on an Extra Reflector Network : Another line of research aims to improve the self-correction capability of LLMs by fine-tuning it on an external dataset [Yao et al., 2023]. It often requires to collect an additional dataset especially tailored for the training of a reflector network. For instance, Chen et al. [2024] design an erroneous solution rewriting task for reflector training. In contrast, we perform self-correction using free-form environmental feedback and do not need to train an extra network. 

Self-Correction based on Induction : Prior work has explored encoding past experiences into text-form memory and incorporating this memory into prompts to enhance decision-making in subsequent trials [Shinn et al., 2024, Zhao et al., 2024, Zelikman et al., 2022]. There is also a line of works leveraging LLMs to generate rewards – either as codes or natural language prompts – and iteratively refine these rewards based on environmental feedback through in-context learning [Ma et al., 2023, Kwon et al., 2023, Yu et al., 2023, Li et al., 2024]. These studies assume that LLMs, through in-context learning, can infer environmental rules and adapt to new trajectories/experiences with only a few observed transitions. In contrast to these approaches, we assume that the rewards or reflections obtained from one trajectory are not directly transferable to other trajectories. Thus, in this work, we proposed to use in-context learning in a "retrospective" manner. 

Self-Correction Through Preference Alignment : Iterative RPO [Pang et al., 2024] labels preference data based on environmental feedback and uses this feedback as a supervised signal to fine-tune LLMs. RICO-GRPO [Wang et al., 2025] use trajectory level reward and ground normalization to estimate the advantage function for multi-turn online RL training. However, these methods don’t perform explicit temporal credit assignment. In contrast, our approach generates dense rewards by leveraging the pretrained knowledge of LLMs through in-context learning. This enables the policy to be trained with more informative supervision signals. 

Temporal Credit Assignment using LLMs : The goal of temporal credit assignment is to identify the critical states and actions in sequential decision-making. A common approach to credit assignment involves estimating a value or advantage function based on learning experiences [Schulman et al., 2015, Ahmadian et al., 2024]. Unlike RICO-PPO [Wang et al., 2025] training a value network from 2scratch, which can be sample inefficient, our approach leverages in-context learning with pretrained LLMs to perform credit assignment more effectively. Please refer to Table 1 for a more intuitive comparison of our proposed method with related works on self-correction in LLMs. 

## 3 Preliminary 

Markov Decision Process: A Markov Decision Process (MDP) can be described as a tuple 

(S, A, P, r, γ, ρ 0). Here, S and A represent the state and action space, respectively; P : S ×A×S → 

[0 , 1] is the transition kernel; r : S × A → R is a reward function; γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor; 

ρ0(·) denotes a distribution of the initial state. 

KL-Regularized Policy Updates: KL-regularized policy optimization [Abdolmaleki et al., 2018] enhances policy stability by constraining each update to remain close to the previous policy. The objec-tive is to learn a new policy πk+1 that maximizes the expected advantage while penalizing deviations from the old policy: πk+1 = arg max π Es∼ρπk ,a ∼π(·| s)[Aπk (s, a ) − βD KL (π(·| s)|| πk(·| s))] , where 

Aπk (s, a ) is the advantage function, and β > 0 controls the trade-off between policy improvement and stability. The resulting policy update admits a closed-form solution: 

πk+1 (a|s) ∝ πk(a|s) exp   1 

> β

Aπk (s, a ), ∀(s, a ) ∈ S × A . (1) This update exponentially favors advantageous actions while ensuring smooth policy changes via the KL constraint. 

## 4 Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal Credit Assignment 

Given the current policy and its experience, the goal of temporal credit assignment is to identify critical state-action pairs for sequential decision-making. Critical states are those where policy decisions significantly influence the expected return-to-go, while critical actions indicate policy update directions at those states. In RL, credit assignment is typically performed by estimating the advantage function, which measures the impact of different actions at a given state on the future return-to-go under the current policy. Thus, in this section, we propose leveraging LLMs to estimate advantage functions for temporal credit assignment, using retrospective in-context learning guided by environmental feedback. 4.1 LLMs as Policies 

Consider the case where an LLM is used as a policy π01. This policy can be refined through in-context learning by embedding task descriptions or goal-related hints into the prompt, resulting in an in-context updated policy, π′. Unlike standard RL, the transition from π0 to π′ in in-context learning is not an explicit optimization process. However, we can infer the implicit advantage function driving this policy improvement by analyzing the log-probabilities of π0 and π′. The theoretical foundation of this approach is established in the following theorem. 

Theorem 4.1. Let π0 : S × A → (0 , 1) and π′ : S × A → (0 , 1) be any two policies in an MDP with transition kernel P : S × A × S → [0 , 1] and discount factor γ ∈ [0 , 1] . Then, there exists a reward function r : S × A → R such that the following relationship holds: 

β log π′(a|s)

π0(a|s) ∝ Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ), (2) 

where β > 0 is a known scaling parameter, and Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ) denotes the advantage function under policy π0 in the finite MDP (S, A, P, r, γ ).Proof. See Appendix B. 

Our algorithm, as detailed later, assumes the existence of a reward function such that the corresponding advantage function explains the discrepancy between the in-context updated policy π′ and the actor policy π0. Theorem 4.1 establishes the existence of such a reward function for any pair of policies, thereby supporting the soundness of our proposed online RL framework.           

> 1For an LLM-based policy, each state scorresponds to a prompt, while each action ais represented as a sequence of tokens (e.g., "turn right" or "move forward"). Consequently, the probability π(a|s)can be computed as the token prediction probability of aoccurring after sin the LLM’s autoregressive generation.

34.2 Implementation Details 

The procedure for estimating the advantage function Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ) of a policy π0 is as follows: First, we collect n trajectories starting from the state-action pair (s, a ), by executing the policy π0. Then, for each trajectory τ (i), we perform retrospective in-context learning (introduced in the following subsection) to update the LLM and get an updated policy π′(i).According to Theorem 4.1, we have β log π′(i)(a|s) = β log π0(a|s) + Aπ0 

> ri

(s, a ) − β log Z(i)(s),where Z(i)(s) is a partition function to ensure that π′(i) is a valid probability distribution. In this paper, we consider only tasks with a discrete and enumerable action space, allowing Z(i)(s) to be computed by summing over the probabilities of all possible actions. Aπ0 

> ri

(s, a ) is derived from log π′(i)(a|s)

and log π0(a|s) and is a sample estimate for the ground-truth advantage function Aπ0 

> r∗

(s, a ). Thus, we can use the sample mean ¯Aπ0 

> r

as the estimated advantage function, which is defined as: 

¯Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ) = βn

> n

X

> i=1



log π′(i)(a|s)

π0(a|s) + log Z(i)(s)



. (3) Empirical results demonstrate that ¯Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ) closely approximates the ground-truth advantage func-tion Aπr∗ (s, a ). Recall the policy improvement step shown in Eq. (1), this alignment suggests that the in-context learning with LLMs implicitly performs KL-Regularized Policy Updates. 4.3 Retrospective In-Context Learning 

As aforementioned, π′ is updated from π0 using Retrospective In-Context Learning (RICL), a novel in-context learning algorithm for refining LLM agents. RICL is illustrated as step ② and step ③ in Figure 1. First, given a state st and its corresponding hindsight trajectory – a sequence of future states, actions, and rewards {st:T , a t:T −1, r t:T −1} where T denotes the episode horizon –we input this trajectory into a reflector LLM, πref lect , to generate a verbal feedback ft. The reflector can be any LLM, prompted to analyze the hindsight trajectory and provide corrective feedback to improve the agent’s performance at state st. Next, we integrate the feedback ft into the original LLM’s prompt, yielding an in-context updated policy π′(·| st) = π0(·| st, f t). This policy is then used to estimate the advantage function for temporal credit assignment, as introduced in the previous subsection. RICL offers two key advantages over previous in-context learning algorithms [Shinn et al., 2024]. First, it generates verbal feedback for each action individually, whereas prior methods provide a single feedback for the entire trajectory, allowing for more fine-grained guidance. Second, it employs retrospective updates, meaning the policy is updated specifically for the states it has just encountered, rather than requiring the reflector LLM to generalize to unseen states. This method reduces the complexity of tasks assigned to in-context learning and lessens the dependence on reflector LLMs. 

## 5 Retrospective In-Context Online Learning 

Once the log-probabilities of the in-context updated policy are obtained, which indicate the advan-tage function, policy improvement can be performed straightforwardly using advantage-weighted regression [Peng et al., 2019]. In this section, we integrate the policy improvement phase with the previously introduced policy evaluation phase (i.e., RICL) to develop a practical online RL algorithm: Retrospective In-Context Online Learning (RICOL). 

5.1 Policy Improvement based on RICL 

To learn from the in-context improved policy π′, we can adopt the following objective: 

π∗ = argmax 

> π

Es,a ∼π [Aπ0 (s, a )] = argmax 

> π

Es∼dπ ,a ∼π(·| s) [log π′(a|s) − log π0(a|s)] , (4) where dπ (s) = (1 − γ) P∞ 

> t=0

γtρπt (s) represents the discounted state occupancy measure for policy 

π and ρπt (s) denotes the probability that policy π visits state s at time t.4s0

𝜋 𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡 

feedback 0

𝑠 0, 𝑎 0, 𝑠 1

,𝑎 1, 𝑠 2, 𝑟 

𝜋 0 (∙ | s0)

𝑠 0 𝑠 1 𝑠 2

𝑎 0~ 𝜋 0 (∙ | s0)

𝑟 

𝑎 1~𝜋 0(∙ | s1)

𝑠 0 𝑠 1 𝑠 2

𝑎 0

𝑟 

𝑎 1

𝜋 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑦 

s0

feedback 0

𝜋 ′(∙ | s0)

𝜋 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑦  𝜋 𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡 

feedback 1 𝑠 1,𝑎 1, 𝑠 2, 𝑟  

> 1
> 3
> 2
> 2
> 4

𝜋 ∗ = arg min 

> 𝜋

𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 (𝜋 |𝜋 ′)

feedback 0 feedback 1Figure 1: The pipeline of retrospective in-context online learning, where step ② and step ③ represent retrospective in-context learning. Inspired by AWR [Peng et al., 2019], we can reuse samples collected with π0 to avoid resampling from π and so improve the algorithm’s sample efficiency, with a smarter objective design: 

min  

> π

Es∼dπ0



DKL 

 1

Z(s) ⊙ exp ((1 − α) log π0(·| s) + α log π′(·| s)) || π(·| s)

 

(5) where Z(s) is a partition function , ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication, and hyperparameter α

controls the size of the trust region. The derivation from Eq. (4) to Eq. (5) is detailed in Appendix A. Integrating the sampling policy π0 into the objective function introduces trust region constraints, akin to those used in online RL [Schulman, 2015]. These constraints regulate policy updates, ensuring that deviations from the current sampling policy remain bounded during optimization. By anchoring updates within a local region around π0, the trust region term helps mitigate overfitting to potentially noisy verbal feedback generated through in-context learning. 

5.2 Pipeline of RICOL Algorithm 1 RICOL 

Input: π0, π ref lect , K, n 

for k = 0 · · · K − 1 do for i = 1 · · · n do 

τ (i) 

> k

∼ πk(·| s0)

for st = s0 · · · sT −1 ∈ τ (i) 

> k

do 

feedback t ∼ πref lect (·| st:T , r t:T −1)

π′(i)

> k+1

(·| st) ← πk(·| st, feedback t)

end for end for 

πk+1 ← argmin π Es∼τk [DKL 

  1 

> Z(s)

⊙ exp( (1 − α) log πk(·| s) + α log π′(·| s)) || π(·| s)]

end for Trajectory Collection: During iteration k, the policy πk interacts with the environment to col-lect a batch of trajectories τk. Each trajec-tory comprises state-action-reward sequences 

(s1: T , a 1: T −1, r 1: T −1).

Policy Evaluation: For each state st in τ (i) 

> k

,RICOL applies RICL (detailed in Section 4.3) to perform an in-context update on the pol-icy πk(·| st), resulting in an improved policy 

π′(i)

> k+1

(·| st). To estimate π′

> k+1

(·| st), we fol-low the process: [π′(i)

> k+1

(·| st), π k(·| st)] ni=1 →

[Aπk 

> ri

(st, ·)] ni=1 → ¯Aπk 

> r

(st, ·) → π′

> k+1

(·| st),where the first two steps are detailed in Sec-tion 4.2 and the last step is according to 

β log π′   

> k+1 (at|st)
> πk(ak|st)

∝ ¯Aπk 

> r

(st, a t) (i.e., Eq. (2)). 

Policy Improvement: After computing π′

> k+1

(·| st) across the batch of states in τk, the policy πk

is updated via gradient descent to minimize the objective in Eq. (5). For environments with small, discrete action spaces, the KL-divergence in Eq. (5) is computed exactly by enumerating all actions. This requires querying the LLM |A| times per state. For general tasks, the KL-divergence can be estimated by sampling from π∗(·| s) ∝ exp ((1 − α) log πk(·| s) + α log π′(·| s)) , avoiding exhaustive action enumeration. 56 Experiments 

In this section, we present a series of experiments to address the following research questions (RQs): 

RQ1 : How effective is RICL at credit assignment in multi-turn tasks? Compared to traditional RL methods, how sample-efficient is RICL in credit assignment? RQ2 : The proposed method relies on LLMs, which may be unreliable. How does RICL compare to other reflection-based LLM methods in terms of reliability? Given that RICL may be unreliable, can RICOL still learn effectively from noisy labels? RQ3 : Can RICOL efficiently learn from sparse rewards in multi-turn tasks? How does its performance compare to baseline methods, and what types of tasks is it best suited for? 

6.1 Environments 

We evaluate our algorithms on a 1D Key-Door environment and four BabyAI scenarios. In all settings, both the policy inputs (observations) and outputs (actions) are represented in text form. The action space is discrete and enumerable. In the 1D Key-Door environment, the agent operates on a 1D grid world, moving along the x-axis. The key is placed in the leftmost cell, and the door in the rightmost. The agent starts without the key and must first move left to retrieve it, then move right to unlock the door. This setup enables exact computation of the ground-truth advantage at each cell, making it ideal for evaluating RICL’s credit assignment capabilities. We test RICOL on four BabyAI [Carta et al., 2023] tasks: goto , pickup , pick_up_seq_go_to , and open . BabyAI is a 2D grid world where the agent must complete language-conditioned tasks. These tasks are challenging to LLMs, due to their limited spatial reasoning abilities and the long episode lengths. As shown in Figure 4, even GPT-4o mini achieves a success rate of no more than 40% across all four BabyAI scenarios. More details on the tasks and associated prompt templates are available in Appendix E. 

6.2 Sample Efficiency of RICL in Credit Assignment (RQ1) 1 10 100 1000 

> Samples
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Error ( emethod ) RICL
> MC

Figure 2: Comparison of error in advan-tage function estimation. The x-axis rep-resents the number of trajectories used for estimation, while the y-axis shows the mean error between the estimated ad-vantage and the ground-truth advantages. RICL achieves significantly lower error with fewer samples (around 10) com-pared to Monte Carlo, which requires about 1000 samples for similar accuracy. Additionally, the error of RICL is more stable across trials (lower variance). In this subsection, we demonstrate that RICL achieves greater sample efficiency ( 100 ×) compared to classic Monte Carlo (MC) methods when estimating the advan-tage function in the 1D Key-Door scenario. Since RL methods alternate between policy evaluation (value func-tion estimation) and policy improvement, a more sample-efficient policy evaluation approach can significantly speed up the overall training process. We measure the discrepancy between estimated and ground-truth advantage functions for both MC and RICL. For each (st, a t), we generate n trajectories starting from st using the policy π0. MC estimates the Q-value ˆQπ0 (st, a t) as the average return-to-go across the 

n trajectories. The estimated advantage function is de-fined as ˆAπ0 (st, a t) = ˆQπ0 (st, a t) − ˆV π0 (st), where 

ˆV π0 (st) = Ea∼π0(·| st)[ ˆQπ0 (st, a t)] . The updated pol-icy under MC is accordingly defined as πMC (at|st) ∝

π0(at|st) exp( ˆAπ0 (st, a t)/β ). On the other hand, RICL estimates the advantage function ¯Aπ0 (st, a t) directly from 

n trajectories using the procedure outlined in Section 4.2. The corresponding policy πRICL (at|st) is similarly defined as πRICL (at|st) ∝ π0(at|st) exp( ¯Aπ0 (st, a t)/β ). Finally, to evaluate both methods, we leverage ground-truth advan-tage function Aπ0 (st, a t) to compute the reference policy 

πgt (at|st) ∝ π0(at|st) exp( Aπ0 (st, a t)/β ).The performance of MC and RICL is assessed by computing the expected KL divergence between their respective policies and the ground-truth policy. This expectation is taken over states sampled from ρ0, a uniform distribution over all possible initial states in the 1D grid-world. Formally, the error for each method is defined as: emethod = Es∼ρ0 [DKL (πmethod (·| s) ∥ πgt (·| s))] . By definition 6of the policies, when πmethod (·| s) closely approximates πgt (·| s), the estimated advantage function likewise approaches the ground-truth advantage function. For each value of n (number of trajectories), we run eight trials with different random seeds. We report the mean KL divergence and standard deviation. These results are visualized in Figure 2, where the x-axis represents the number of samples n. As shown in Figure 2, LLMs achieve an accurate estimate of advantage functions with just 10 samples, while MC requires around 1000 samples to reach a similar accuracy. Furthermore, the standard deviation of the error of RICL is much lower than that of MC. This suggests that RICL is particularly advantageous for tasks that require high sample efficiency, where leveraging the pretrained knowledge of LLMs is crucial. In Appendix H, we compare RICL with an LLM-based method (Retroformer [Yao et al., 2023]) in terms of sample efficiency for value function estimation. Further, in Appendix G, we show that RICL can identify critical states in sequential decision-making, based on the result of credit assignment. 6.3 RICL Enables More Reliable In-Context Updates via Retrospective Design (RQ2) Base ICL RICL 

> 0.40
> 0.43
> 0.46
> 0.49
> 0.52
> Accuracy

Figure 3: Accuracy comparison of ICL and RICL on predicting expert actions in the BabyAI goto scenario across 1000 trajectories. The Base bar shows the zero-shot performance of LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct. RICL outperforms ICL by 7.2%, demonstrating the effectiveness of retrospective updates. Standard ICL follows these steps: (1) Use an actor LLM to generate a trajectory τ ; (2) Use a reflector LLM to generate verbal feedback based on τ ; (3) Use the verbal feedback to perform an in-context update of the actor. While integrat-ing ICL into the training loop improves sample efficiency, it also introduces instability, because we cannot assume that experiences from one trajectory can be applied to any other state in the environment. As an improvement, RICL shares steps (1)–(3) with ICL, but uses the in-context up-dated policy to compute the action distribution over the states in τ only . In this section, we empirically demon-strate that using environmental feedback to retrospectively in-context update the policy on the same trajectory that produced the feedback (i.e., RICL) leads to more effective and reliable policy improvement than updating the policy on a different trajectory (i.e., ICL). Figure 3 compares RICL and ICL in the BabyAI goto 

scenario and uses LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct as actor and reflector LLMs. We conduct experiments on 1000 different trajectories. We use accuracy as the evaluation metric, defined as the probability that the policy selects the expert action. The base policy reflects the performance of the zero-shot LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct model. In terms of accuracy, RICL outperforms ICL by 7.2%, confirming that retrospective updates are both more effective and more reliable. 

6.4 Benchmarking RICOL (RQ3) 

Here, we compare RICOL against four baseline algorithms across four BabyAI scenarios and demonstrate that it achieves state-of-the-art performance in solving multi-turn tasks with higher sample efficiency. We adopt Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct as the policy and GPT-4o mini as the reflector. Regarding evaluation metrics, we use environment time steps (for sampling) and task success rates to evaluate sample efficiency and effectiveness of the algorithms, respectively. The remaining experiments in the paper report the mean and standard deviation across three different random seeds. 

Baselines: (1) GPT-4o mini: This baseline uses GPT-4o-mini as the policy, providing a measure of the zero-shot performance of state-of-the-art LLMs on the benchmark tasks. Moreover, since GPT-4o-mini serves as the reflector in our algorithm, improvements over this baseline demonstrate that simple behavioral cloning of the reflector is insufficient, highlighting the necessity of our algorithmic design for effective policy improvement. (2) Reflexion: Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2024] relies on in-context learning with iterative self-reflection. A base policy first interacts with the environment to collect a trajectory, which is used to prompt an LLM for verbal feedback. The policy then uses this feedback to generate a new trajectory, which is again used to update the feedback. This process repeats iteratively. (3) PPO (3B): We fine-tune a Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct model using PPO, where the 3B model serves as both the policy’s and the critic’s backbone. More details are provided in 710 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6                 

> Env Steps
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Win Rate (%)
> goto
> 10 210 310 410 510 6
> Env Steps
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> pickup
> 10 210 310 410 510 6
> Env Steps
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100 pick_up_seq_go_to
> 10 210 310 410 510 6
> Env Steps
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> open
> Reflexion RICOL (ours) PPO (3B) PPO (10M) GPT-4o mini

Figure 4: Comparison of our method (RICOL) against four baseline algorithms across four BabyAI scenarios. RICOL consistently demonstrates superior sample efficiency, achieving strong performance with significantly fewer interactions. Notably, RICOL outperforms both PPO (10M) and PPO (3B), by over 50 × and 10 × fewer environment steps, respectively. Compared to Reflexion, an in-context learning method using trajectory-level verbal feedback, RICOL exhibits better convergent performance by leveraging temporal credit assignment (from RICL) and state-specific feedback. Additionally, RICOL surpasses GPT-4o mini, despite using a smaller policy model (LLaMA-3.2-3B-Instruct), underscoring the importance of interactive learning from the environment. As a useful trick to boost performance, we use the real environment rewards as the advantage and apply advantage-weighted regression during the second stage of training, after RICOL completes its predefined training schedule in the first stage. 

Appendix F. We use Qwen instead of LLaMA due to prior findings [Gandhi et al., 2025] suggesting Qwen exhibits stronger reasoning behaviors such as verification and backtracking. (4) PPO (10M): 

This baseline uses two randomly initialized 3-layer MLPs for the policy and critic, respectively. It serves to test whether LLMs’ pretrained knowledge provides any advantage during learning. 

Results: (1) Figure 4 shows that the in-context learning method Reflexion is sample-efficient, but its performance gains saturate quickly. We attribute this to two factors. First, unlike other algorithms, in-context learning does not update the LLM’s parameters, limiting its ability to effectively acquire new knowledge. Second, Reflexion relies on verbal feedback at the trajectory level, while our method provides verbal feedback for each specific state. As a result, Reflexion saturates early because the general (trajectory-level) rules it can easily capture from the environment are limited. Here is an example of the verbal feedback learned by Reflexion : "In future navigation tasks, look for opportunities to reposition yourself to move closer to your goal". In contrast, our method generates more precise, state-specific feedback: "Prioritize picking up the green key first by taking action D when you are in front of it, rather than moving towards the grey box." (2) Regarding comparisons with PPO-based methods, PPO (10M) requires approximately 0.1 to 1 million time steps to converge across most scenarios, highlighting the sample inefficiency of training from scratch without leveraging LLMs’ pretrained knowledge. In contrast, our method achieves comparable performance while using nearly 50 times less data. PPO (3B), which adopts LLMs as both the policy and critic, converges in about 20,000 time steps on most scenarios. Our method is approximately 10 × more sample efficient 

than this approach. While our algorithm also uses an LLM for the policy, it does not require training a critic. Instead, our value function approximation method, RICL, is more sample-efficient than Monte Carlo-based ones (as used in PPO), further supporting the argument made in Section 6.2. (3) 

Finally, our method outperforms GPT-4o-mini in success rates across all four scenarios, despite using a smaller 3B model as the policy. This underscores the importance of learning through interaction with the environment, rather than merely imitating the outputs of a larger models. In addition to sample efficiency, we also report the training time of each algorithm on each task in Table 2. In summary, RICOL is well-suited for settings with limited simulation budgets, typically ranging from 1,000 to 10,000 environment steps. In these scenarios, where environment interactions are costly, sample efficiency is crucial, making our method a compelling and practical choice. 

6.5 RICOL Benefits from Credit Assignment (RQ3) 

RICOL can be interpreted as a combination of RICL for credit assignment and AWR for policy improvement. In contrast, RWR [Peters and Schaal, 2007] directly uses trajectory-level rewards as returns to perform AWR updates on an LLM policy. Unlike RICOL, RWR does not assign credit to individual time steps within an episode, making it less effective for tasks with sparse rewards. Here, we compare RWR with RICOL to show that RICOL benefits from credit assignment. 80 1 2       

> Env Steps (k)
> 25
> 50
> 75
> Win Rate (%)  goto
> 012
> Env Steps (k)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> pickup
> 0510
> Env Steps (k)
> 0
> 20
> pick_up_seq_go_to
> 0510
> Env Steps (k)
> 0
> 5
> open
> RICOL RWR

Figure 5: RICOL employs in-context credit assignment to generate dense learning signals, enabling more sample-efficient policy training. In contrast, RWR lacks credit assignment, depends on strong base policies with high initial success rates, and performs poorly on tasks with sparse rewards. Figure 5 shows that RWR achieves competitive performance only in the goto scenario, where the base policy already attains a relatively high success rate of 25%. This highlights the limitation of relying solely on trajectory-level rewards. In contrast, our method leverages RICL to generate dense supervised signals, as described in Section 4, thereby enabling more effective policy training for LLMs, particularly in sparse-reward environments. 

6.6 RICOL is Robust to Noisy Verbal Feedback (RQ2) 0 2 4 6 8

> Iterations
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> Success Rate
> Imitation Learning
> 100% feedback
> 80% feedback
> 70% feedback

Figure 6: The performance of RICOL under varying verbal feedback accuracy. The agent is trained with hand-crafted verbal feedback of different accuracy levels. Despite the presence of noise, RICOL maintains strong performance. Note that 50% accuracy corresponds to random feedback. Figure 6 illustrates how the accuracy of verbal feedback affects the performance of RICOL in the BabyAI goto 

scenario. In this experiment, we train the agent using hand-crafted verbal feedback and systematically vary its accuracy to assess RICOL’s robustness. The hand-crafted verbal feedback acts as a binary correctness indicator for the actions in trajectories, framed as: "In the previous attempt, I chose action [Action]. This time, I will main-tain/change the selected action." To manipulate feedback accuracy, we randomly flip the correctness labels in the verbal feedback at different rates, thus simulating various levels of feedback reliability. An accuracy of 100% corre-sponds to perfectly accurate feedback, while random feed-back yields an accuracy of approximately 50%. As shown in Figure 6, RICOL remains effective even when verbal feedback accuracy drops to 70%. This result demonstrates that RICOL does not rely heavily on accurate verbal feed-back during training. We attribute this robustness to the trust region term introduced in the loss function during the policy improvement step (Eq. 5), which helps normalize the impact of noisy supervision and stabilize learning. 

## 7 Conclusion 

We propose a novel in-context learning algorithm, RICL, to convert sparse environmental feedback into dense training signals for estimating advantage functions and conducting temporal credit assign-ment. We further propose an online learning framework, RICOL, for iterative policy improvement based on the RICL results. Our method mitigates the instability of in-context learning and enables continuous policy refinement. Empirical results on the 1D Key-Door scenario demonstrate RICL’s effectiveness in credit assignment, while results on the BabyAI benchmark show that RICOL is significantly more sample-efficient than traditional online RL methods. As a future direction, we aim to extend and test our algorithm on token-level MDPs and reasoning tasks. 

Limitations : RICOL only supports tasks with discrete, finite action spaces, as when calculating the KL divergence in Eq. 5, it needs to calculate the partition term Z by enumerating all the actions. We believe this limitation is acceptable, as we use LLMs as policies and their output space, i.e., the token space, is inherently discrete. When the action space is not enumerable, for example, when the policy generates extremely long chains of thought before producing the next action, we can replace action enumeration with action sampling. We leave this extension for future work. 98 Acknowledgement 

This work was supported in part by the U.S. Army Futures Command under Contract No. W519TC-23-C-0030. This work used Delta at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) through allocation CIS250651 from the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS) program [Boerner et al., 2023], which is supported by U.S. National Science Foundation grants #2138259, #2138286, #2138307, #2137603, and #2138296. 

## References 

A. Abdolmaleki, J. T. Springenberg, Y. Tassa, R. Munos, N. Heess, and M. Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06920 , 2018. A. Agarwal, N. Jiang, S. M. Kakade, and W. Sun. Reinforcement learning: Theory and algorithms. 

CS Dept., UW Seattle, Seattle, WA, USA, Tech. Rep , 32:96, 2019. A. Ahmadian, C. Cremer, M. Gallé, M. Fadaee, J. Kreutzer, O. Pietquin, A. Üstün, and S. Hooker. Back to basics: Revisiting reinforce style optimization for learning from human feedback in llms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14740 , 2024. M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder, B. McGrew, J. Tobin, O. Pieter Abbeel, and W. Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. T. J. Boerner, S. Deems, T. R. Furlani, S. L. Knuth, and J. Towns. Access: Advancing innovation: Nsf’s advanced cyberinfrastructure coordination ecosystem: Services & support. In Practice and experience in advanced research computing 2023: Computing for the common good , pages 173–176. 2023. M. Cao, L. Shu, L. Yu, Y. Zhu, N. Wichers, Y. Liu, and L. Meng. Drlc: Reinforcement learning with dense rewards from llm critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07382 , 2024. T. Carta, C. Romac, T. Wolf, S. Lamprier, O. Sigaud, and P.-Y. Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3676–3713. PMLR, 2023. S. Chaudhari, P. Aggarwal, V. Murahari, T. Rajpurohit, A. Kalyan, K. Narasimhan, A. Deshpande, and B. C. da Silva. Rlhf deciphered: A critical analysis of reinforcement learning from human feedback for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08555 , 2024. Z. Chen, K. Zhou, W. X. Zhao, J. Wan, F. Zhang, D. Zhang, and J.-R. Wen. Improving large language models via fine-grained reinforcement learning with minimum editing constraint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06081 , 2024. M. Chevalier-Boisvert, D. Bahdanau, S. Lahlou, L. Willems, C. Saharia, T. H. Nguyen, and Y. Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of grounded language learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08272 , 2018. H. Dong, W. Xiong, B. Pang, H. Wang, H. Zhao, Y. Zhou, N. Jiang, D. Sahoo, C. Xiong, and T. Zhang. Rlhf workflow: From reward modeling to online rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07863 , 2024. K. Gandhi, A. Chakravarthy, A. Singh, N. Lile, and N. D. Goodman. Cognitive behaviors that enable self-improving reasoners, or, four habits of highly effective stars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01307 ,2025. J. Huang, X. Chen, S. Mishra, H. S. Zheng, A. W. Yu, X. Song, and D. Zhou. Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01798 , 2023. G. Kim, P. Baldi, and S. McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:39648–39677, 2023. 10 M. Kwon, S. M. Xie, K. Bullard, and D. Sadigh. Reward design with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001 , 2023. H. Li, X. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, X. Wang, H. Li, L. Lu, and J. Dai. Auto mc-reward: Automated dense reward design with large language models for minecraft. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16426–16435, 2024. Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Jayaraman, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anand-kumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12931 , 2023. A. Madaan, N. Tandon, P. Gupta, S. Hallinan, L. Gao, S. Wiegreffe, U. Alon, N. Dziri, S. Prabhumoye, Y. Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. T. X. Olausson, J. P. Inala, C. Wang, J. Gao, and A. Solar-Lezama. Demystifying gpt self-repair for code generation. CoRR , 2023. D. Paglieri, B. Cupiał, S. Coward, U. Piterbarg, M. Wolczyk, A. Khan, E. Pignatelli, Ł. Kuci´ nski, L. Pinto, R. Fergus, et al. Balrog: Benchmarking agentic llm and vlm reasoning on games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13543 , 2024. R. Y. Pang, W. Yuan, K. Cho, H. He, S. Sukhbaatar, and J. Weston. Iterative reasoning preference optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.19733 , 2024. X. B. Peng, A. Kumar, G. Zhang, and S. Levine. Advantage-weighted regression: Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177 , 2019. J. Peters and S. Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational space control. In Z. Ghahramani, editor, Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference (ICML 2007), Corvallis, Oregon, USA, June 20-24, 2007 , volume 227 of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series , pages 745–750. ACM, 2007. doi: 10.1145/1273496.1273590. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1273496.1273590 .E. Pignatelli, J. Ferret, T. Rockäschel, E. Grefenstette, D. Paglieri, S. Coward, and L. Toni. Assessing the zero-shot capabilities of llms for action evaluation in rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12798 ,2024. A. Z. Ren, A. Dixit, A. Bodrova, S. Singh, S. Tu, N. Brown, P. Xu, L. Takayama, F. Xia, J. Varley, et al. Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment for large language model planners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01928 , 2023. J. Schulman. Trust region policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.05477 , 2015. J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 , 2015. G. Sheng, C. Zhang, Z. Ye, X. Wu, W. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Peng, H. Lin, and C. Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems , pages 1279–1297, 2025. N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. S. Sukhbaatar, Z. Lin, I. Kostrikov, G. Synnaeve, A. Szlam, and R. Fergus. Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asymmetric self-play. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.05407 , 2017. K. Valmeekam, M. Marquez, and S. Kambhampati. Investigating the effectiveness of self-critiquing in LLMs solving planning tasks. In NeurIPS 2023 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop , 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gGQfkyb0KL .Z. Wang, K. Wang, Q. Wang, P. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Yang, K. Yu, M. N. Nguyen, L. Liu, E. Gottlieb, et al. Ragen: Understanding self-evolution in llm agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20073 , 2025. 11 W. Yao, S. Heinecke, J. C. Niebles, Z. Liu, Y. Feng, L. Xue, R. Murthy, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Arpit, et al. Retroformer: Retrospective large language agents with policy gradient optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02151 , 2023. W. Yu, N. Gileadi, C. Fu, S. Kirmani, K.-H. Lee, M. G. Arenas, H.-T. L. Chiang, T. Erez, L. Hasen-clever, J. Humplik, et al. Language to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647 , 2023. E. Zelikman, Y. Wu, J. Mu, and N. Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15476–15488, 2022. A. Zhao, D. Huang, Q. Xu, M. Lin, Y.-J. Liu, and G. Huang. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 19632–19642, 2024. B. D. Ziebart. Modeling Purposeful Adaptive Behavior with the Principle of Maximum Causal Entropy . PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, USA, 2010. B. D. Ziebart, A. L. Maas, J. A. Bagnell, and A. K. Dey. Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 1433–1438. AAAI Press, 2008. 

## NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our main contribution is the proposal of RIOCL, an online reinforcement learning algorithm that leverages the pretrained knowledge of LLMs to learn sample-efficiently from interactions with the environment. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We discuss the limitation in Section 7. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. 12 • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide the proof of Theorem 4.1 in Appendix B. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have provided the code in the supplementary materials. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed 13 instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have provided the code in the supplementary materials. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We describe the training environment in Section 6.1 and the prompt templates in Appendix E. Guidelines: 14 • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The results are accompanied by error bars or confidence intervals. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide enough details in Appendix D Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. 15 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: There is no societal impact of the work performed. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper poses no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

16 Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Yes, all assets used in the paper—including code, data, and models—are properly credited. Their licenses and terms of use are explicitly stated and fully respected. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 17 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: While LLMs are used in this work, their usage does not constitute an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methodology. They were not involved in a way that impacts the scientific rigor, novelty, or conclusions of the research. Therefore, declaration is not required under the given guidelines. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 18 A Derivation of the Loss Function 

The derivation is mainly from Peng et al. [2019]. The goal of the gradient update step is to bring π

closer to π′. One way to achieve this is by maximizing the following objective: 

η(π) = Es∼dπ (·),a ∼π(·| s) [log π′(a|s) − log πk(a|s)] , (6) where dπ (s) = P∞ 

> t=0

γtp(st = s|π) represents the unnormalized discounted state distribution induced by the policy π, and p(st = s|π) is the likelihood of the agent being in state s after following 

π for t time-steps. For simplicity, we use πk in the appendix but π0 in the main text; both denote the sampling policy. In practice, to enhance sample efficiency, we aim to use dπk (s) instead of dπ (s) when estimating 

η(π), where πk is the policy used to sample new data. Therefore, similar to Peng et al. [2019], we can employ ˆη(π) as an approximation of η(π) in practical implementations. 

ˆη(π) = X

> s

dπk (s) X

> a

π(a|s)



log ( π′(a|s)

πk(a|s) )



. (7) 

ˆη(π) is a reasonable estimator of η(π) only when π and πk are sufficiently similar. Therefore, rather than directly solving the optimization problem max π η(π), we can instead reformulate it as the following optimization problem: 

argmax 

> π

X

> s

dπk (s) X

> a

π(a|s)



log( π′(a|s)

πk(a|s) )



s.t. X

> s

dπk (s)DKL (π(·| s)|| πk(·| s)) ≤ ϵ

X

> a

π(a|s) = 1 , ∀s. 

(8) By applying the method of Lagrange multipliers to the constrained optimization problem, the optimal policy can be expressed as follows: 

π∗(a|s) = 1

Z(s) πk(a|s) exp 

 1

α log π′(a|s)

πk(a|s)



, (9) where Z(s) = P 

> a′

πk(a′|s) exp 

 1 

> α

log π′(a|s) 

> πk(a|s)



normalizes the optimal policy and α is the La-grange multiplier. Finally, we need to project π∗ back onto the manifold of parameterized policies. This can be achieved by optimizing the following objective: 

argmin 

> π

Es∼dπ0 (s) [DKL (π∗(·| s)|| π(·| s))] = argmin 

> π

Es∼dπ0 (s)



DKL 

 1

Z(s) · πk(·| s) ⊙ exp( 1

α log π′

> k+1

(·| s)

πk(·| s) )|| π(·| s)

 

= argmin 

> π

Es∼dπ0 (s)



DKL 

 1

Z(s) · exp((1 − 1

α ) log πk(·| s) + 1

α log π′

> k+1

(·| s)) || π(·| s)

 

= argmin 

> π

Es∼dπ0 (s)



DKL 

 1

Z(s) · exp((1 − α∗) log πk(·| s) + α∗ log π′

> k+1

(·| s)) || π(·| s)

 

,

(10) where ⊙ represents the element-wise multiplication. In practice, we treat α∗ = 1 /α as a hyper-parameter that controls the size of the trust region. 19 B Proof of Theorem 4.1 

Proof. Let π0 : S × A → (0 , 1) and π : S × A → (0 , 1) be any two policies in a finite MDP 

(S, A, P, r, γ ), where r : S × A → R is unknown. According to Eq. (2), we have: (∀s ∈ S , a ∈ A )

π(a|s) = π0(a|s) exp ( Aπ0 

> r

(s, a )/β )

Z(s) ⇒ Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ) = β



log π(a|s)

π0(a|s) + log Z(s)



(11) Here, Z(s) is a normalization factor and is a function of π(·| s) and π0(·| s) since P 

> a

Aπ0 

> r

(s, a )/β =

P 

> a

log π(a|s) 

> π0(a|s)

+ log Z(s) = h(π0). Thus, given π and π0, we can acquire the advantage function 

Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ) for all (s, a ).Next, we derive the relation between Aπ0 

> r

and r under the maximum entropy RL framework. Accord-ing to Ziebart et al. [2008], Ziebart [2010], the advantage function Aπ0 

> r

, value function V π0 , and Q function Qπ0 of a policy π0 are related as follows: ( t is a time step and (st, a t) ∈ S × A .) 

Aπ0 

> r

(st, a t) = Qπ0 (st, a t) − V π0 (st)

V π0 (st) = Eat∼π0(·| st) [Qπ0 (st, a t) − β log π0(at|st)] = X

> at

π0(at|st)Qπ0 (st, a t) + βH(π0(·| st)) 

(12) where H(π0(·| st)) is the policy entropy at state st. Thus, Eat∼π0(·| st)[Aπ0 

> r

(st, a t)] = −βH(π0(·| st)) 

and h(π0) = −H (π0(·| st)) . The Q function satisfies the Soft Bellman Equation: 

Qπ0 (st, a t) = r(st, a t) + γβ Est+1 ∼P (·| st,a t)[H(π0(·| st+1 ))] + γEst+1 ∼P (·| st,a t),a t+1 ∼π0(·| st+1 )[Qπ0 (st+1 , a t+1 )] (13) Denote f (st, a t) = γβ Est+1 ∼P (·| st,a t)[H(π0(·| st+1 ))] , which can be calculated based on P and π0,then we have: 

Qπ0 = ( I − γP π0 )−1(r + f ) (14) where Qπ0 , r, and f are vectors of size |S||A| , I is an identity matrix, P π0 ∈ [0 , 1] |S||A|×|S||A| is the transition kernel between any two state-action pairs defined with P and π0. I − γP π0 is invertible, according to Corollary 1.5 in Agarwal et al. [2019]. Combining Eq. (12) and Eq. (14), we have the following linear system: 

Aπ0 

> r

+ g = ( I′ − Π0)( I − γP π )−1(r + f ) (15) Here, Aπ0 

> r

, log π0, r, f are vectors of Aπ0 

> r

(s, a ), log π0(s, a ), r(s, a ), f (s, a ), respectively; I′ is an identity matrix; g is a vector of size |S||A| , where each g(s, a ) = βH(π0(·| s)) ; Π0 is a block diagonal matrix of size |S||A| × |S||A| , composed of |S| submatrices, each of size |A| × |A| .Specifically, the submatrix corresponding to s is Π0(s) = [ π0(·| s) · · · π0(·| s)] T = 1π0(·| s)T , where 

1 is an all-one vector. I′(s) − Π0(s) is a diagonal block of I′ − Π0 corresponding to state s and has a rank of |A| − 1. This is because: (1) rank (I′(s) − Π0(s) + Π 0(s)) = |A| ≤ rank (I′(s) −

Π0(s)) + rank (Π 0(s)) = rank (I′(s) − Π0(s)) + 1 ⇒ rank (I′(s) − Π0(s)) ≥ |A| − 1 and (2) 1 is an eigenvector of I′(s) − Π0(s) corresponding to an eigenvalue of 0. Next, we proof that the linear system Cx = b corresponding to Eq. (15) is consistent, where 

C = ( I′ − Π0)( I − γP π )−1, x = r + f , and b = Aπ0 

> r

+ g. Note that C, f , and b are defined with γ,

β, P , π0, and π and so are known. We can apply elementary row operations, represented by a matrix 

D, to the augmented matrix [C | b]. In particular, D is also a block diagonal matrix, composed of 

|S| submatrices, each of size |A| × |A| . The submatrix corresponding to state s is an identity matrix with the first row replaced by π(·| s)T . Notably, the 1st, (|A| + 1) -th, (2 |A| + 1) -th, · · · ,

(( |S| − 1) |A| + 1) -th rows of D(I′ − Π0) (and so DC ) and Db are all 0. This can be easily proved based on the following facts: 

π0(a|s)(1 − π0(a|s)) − π0(a|s)

 X 

> a′̸=a

π0(a′|s)

 = 0 ⇒ π0(·| s)T (I′(s) − Π0(s)) = 0T ;

Ea∼π0(·| s)[Aπ0 

> r

(s, a )] = −βH(π0(·| s)) ⇒ Ea∼π0(·| s)b(s) = 0 .

(16) Eliminating these rows in [DC | Db ], we can get a new augmented matrix [ ˜C | ˜b] where ˜C has a full row rank (based on the facts that rank (I′(s) − Π0(s)) = |A| − 1, ∀s and I − γP π is invertible). Thus, the original linear system Cx = b (i.e., Eq. (15)) is consistent, according to the Rouché-Capelli theorem. 20 C Related Works 

Table 1: We propose RICL for LLMs to learn from environmental feedback, fundamentally different from intrinsic self-correction work like SELF-REFINE Madaan et al. [2024]. Unlike STaR [Zelikman et al., 2022] and Reflexion [Shinn et al., 2024], our method utilizes environmental feedback to retrospectively update the policy. Additionally, we do not fine-tune an extra reflector, as done in RLMEC [Chen et al., 2024] and Retroformer [Yao et al., 2023]. By generating dense training signals from sparse environmental feedback, our approach is more sample-efficient than methods that rely solely on sparse preference rewards, such as Iterative RPO [Pang et al., 2024]. Involving Env Feedback Requiring an Extra Reflector Retrospective Updating Multi-turn Credit Assignment SELF-REFINE ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

STaR, Reflexion ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗

RLMEC, Retroformer ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗

Iterative RPO, RICO-GRPO ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗

RICL (Ours) ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓

## D Comparison of Training Times 

Table 2: Training time (in minutes) required for each algorithm on different tasks, along with the GPU setup used. 

Method goto pickup pick_up_seq_go_to open GPU Type 

RWR 72 69 232 227 NVIDIA A40 × 2 RICOL 96 95 594 585 NVIDIA A40 × 2 PPO (10M) 258 257 234 198 GeForce RTX 2080 Ti × 1 PPO (3B) 1440 1440 1440 1440 NVIDIA A40 × 4 

## E Environments 

E.1 1D Key-Door Environment Key  Door Corridor 

Figure 7: An illustration for the 1D Key-Door scenario. As illustrated in Figure 7, the environment consists of a 1D grid world where the agent can traverse along the x-axis. The key is located at the leftmost grid cell, and the door is positioned at the rightmost grid cell. Initially, the agent starts without holding the key, aiming to move left to retrieve the key and subsequently move right to unlock the door. The corridor length used in the paper is 10 . The available action includes {move left, move right, pick up the key, unlock the door }. The prompt can be found in Figure 8 and Figure 9. For any given policy, we can compute the corresponding transition matrix P , where the entry in the 

i-th row and j-th column represents the probability of the agent transitioning from state si to state sj

in a single step. The ground truth value function V can then be computed as: V = ( I − γP )−1R,where γ is the discount factor and R is the reward function. Once the value function is determined, and given that the environment is deterministic, we can compute the advantage function using the following formula: A(s, a ) = V (s) − r(s, a ) − γV (s′) where s′ is the next state resulting from applying action a in state s, and r(s, a ) is the immediate reward received when transitioning from s

to s′ by taking action a.21 You are a helpful navigation agent. 

Please thoroughly review your goal, the available actions, objects around you, and any advice from experts, if 

available, and respond to the question strictly adhering to this specified format: ACTION: [your_answer] 

System Prompt 

User Prompt 

Your goal is to open the locked door. You can choose to: move left, move right, pick up the key, or unlock 

the door . You see the locked door 200 meters away on your right. You don't have the key. You see a key on the 

ground around you. After reviewing the rules of the environment, your goal and objects around you, what do 

you do next to achieve the goal? Figure 8: The prompt used for the LLM policy in the 1D Key-Door scenario. I will provide you with a trajectory starting from step 0 and the state at step 0. 

Firstly, you have to analyze the task, the goal, and the current state, generate a rough plan. 

Then, based on this trajectory, you need to evaluate whether the decision you made at step 0 was correct. 

Additionally, if given another opportunity, how would you modify it, if needed? 

Provide concise verbal feedback as a guideline for others new to this task and facing the same state in the future. 

If the policy is generally correct, you can reply with "No modifications needed." 

After providing your explanation, output your final feedback by strictly following this format: "Verbal Feedback: 

[your_answer ]" 

System Prompt 

User Prompt 

Trajectory/state (skip due to the space limit) 

Figure 9: The prompt used for the LLM reflector in the 1D Key-Door scenario. 22 (a) goto (b) pickup (c) pick_up_seq_go_to (d) open 

Figure 10: Screenshots of four BabyAI scenarios, where the agent is partial-observable. 

E.2 BabyAI Environment 

We evaluate our algorithm in the BabyAI environment [Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018], a 2D grid world where the player navigates an agent to accomplish specified tasks. We use BALROG’s [Paglieri et al., 2024] implementation of the environment. We test our algorithm on four scenarios: goto ,

pickup , pick_up_seq_go_to , and open . As shown in Figure 10, the player directs the agent (a red triangle) toward a specified local object or manipulate it. The environment is partially observable, with the agent having a 7x7 window of visibility in front of it, viewed from an egocentric perspective. The agent can perform six actions: Turn Left, Turn Right, Move Forward, Pickup, Drop, and Toggle. Both input and output for the tasks are presented in text form. The prompt can be found in Figure 11 and Figure 12. We did two editions to the BabyAI environment. Firstly, following Ren et al. [2023], we modify the policy prompt so that its output is constrained to a single character between A and F, with each character corresponding to a specific action. This ensures that the probability of each action is not biased by differences in token length. Secondly, we set the maximum episode length to 16 for the goto and pickup tasks, and 32 for the pick_up_seq_go_to and open tasks. This early truncation improves sample efficiency. All baseline algorithms are evaluated using the updated environment to ensure a fair comparison. You are an agent playing a simple navigation game. Your goal is to {mission}.    

> The following are the possible actions you can take in the game, followed by a short description of each action:
> "A": "turn to the left",
> "B": "turn to the right",
> "C": "take one step forward",
> "D": "pick up the object one step in front of you",
> "E": "drop the object that you are holding",
> "F": "manipulate the object in front of you",
> In a moment I will present you an observation. Tips:
> -Once the desired object you want to interact or pickup in front of you, you can use the 'toggle' action to interact with it.
> -It doesn't make sense to repeat the same action over and over if the observation doesn't change.
> -answer the alphanumerical action, not the description.
> PLAY!
> System Prompt
> User Prompt
> Current Observation:
> a wall 3 steps forward
> a wall 1 step right
> You always have to output one of the above actions at a time and no other text. You always have to output an action
> until the episode terminates.

Figure 11: The prompt used for the LLM policy in all the BabyAI scenarios. 23 You are an agent playing a simple navigation game. Your goal is to {mission}. 

The following are the possible actions you can take in the game, followed by a short description of each action: 

"A": "turn to the left", 

"B": "turn to the right", 

"C": "take one step forward", 

"D": "pick up the object one step in front of you", 

"E": "drop the object that you are holding", 

"F": "manipulate the object in front of you", 

System Prompt 

User Prompt 

You are a coach that can provide feedback to the agent. 

I will provide you the observation at time step t and the action taken by the agent at time step t. 

Then I will provide you the trajectory after that. 

Your task is to carefully analyze the trajectory and reflect on the agent’s decision at time step t. 

If the agent were to face the same situation again (observation at time step t), what advice would you give to better 

achieve the goal? 

Provide your feedback as a concise and informative string. 

The observation at time step t is: { o_t }

The action taken by the agent at time step t is: { a_t }

The trajectory after that is: { traj }

Provide a concise, specific verbal feedback that can help the agent improve its performance when it encounters state 

t again to help it achieve the goal. 

Breifly analyze the agent's decision at time step t and the consequences of the action then provide the feedback. 

You should always follow the format: 

Your goal: [your goal] 

state t: [the state at time step t] 

action t: [the action taken by the agent at time step t] 

state t+1: [the state at time step t+1] 

analyze: [The agent took action t in state t and transitioned to state t+1. Analyze the decision and its consequences, 

does the action help the agent achieve the goal or make progress?] 

Conclusion: [Based on the helpfulness, will you suggest the agent to take action t again, why?] 

Feedback: [your concise verbal feedback that can help the agent improve its performance] Figure 12: The prompt used for the LLM reflector in all the BabyAI scenarios. Only the Feedback 

part is extracted and used for RICL’s in-context policy updates. 24 F PPO Implementation Details 

We implement PPO (3B) based on the VeRL RLVR framework [Sheng et al., 2025], integrated with our own multi-turn dialogue pipeline. Below, we outline the key implementation details. 

State: We largely follow the prompt template provided by the BALROG benchmark [Paglieri et al., 2024]. To efficiently manage context length, we include only the two most recent state–action pairs in the prompt. RICOL adopts the same context management strategy to ensure a fair comparison between our method and the baseline. 

Reward: We employ a sparse binary reward scheme, assigning a single positive reward at the end of a successful trajectory and zero otherwise. This reward structure is applied consistently to both our method and the baselines. Unlike PPO, our algorithm additionally leverages dense implicit rewards derived from the LLM policy, improving sample efficiency. 

Actions: The environment features a discrete action space consisting of move_forward ,

turn_right , turn_left , pickup , drop , and toggle . We assign a penalty of −0.1 to LLM agents when they select an invalid action. 

## G RICL can Identify Critical States in Sequential Decision-Making Move to the Key 

## Pick-up the Key 

## Open the Door 

## States 

## 0.0 

## 0.2 

## 0.4 

## 0.6 

## 0.8 

## 1.0 

> Normalized Critical Score  RICL
> GT
> Verbal

Figure 13: Comparison of critical states identified by RICL and verbal credit assignment. The x-axis represents a sequence of states: the agent first moves toward the key over 9 steps, picks up the key, then moves toward the door over another 9 steps, and finally opens the door. The y-axis indicates the score reflecting how critical each state is, where GT denotes the ground truth. The results show that both algorithms correctly identify the “pick up the key” action as a critical state-action pair. However, only RICL additionally identifies some of the earlier states in the “move to the key” phase as critical. Here, we demonstrate that RICL assigns higher credits to critical states in the environment. Critical states are defined as those where policy adjustments lead to greater performance gains. For the sampling policy π0 and an improved policy π, DKL (π(·| s)|| π0(·| s)) serves as a measure of how significantly the policy needs to be adjusted at state s to achieve policy improvement (from π0(·| s) to 

π(·| s)). Thus, it can be used as a criterion for identifying critical states. Specifically, π can be πgt 

or πRICL (as defined in Section 6.2) to identify the critical states with the ground-truth policy or the RICL-updated policy, respectively. Figure 13 depicts the (normalized) critical score (i.e., vπ = DKL (π(·| s)|| π0(·| s)) ) in the 1D Key-Door scenario using LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct as π0. The yellow curve shows two peaks in the critical score vπgt . The right peak corresponds to the state – picking up the key, which is critical in the 1D Key-Door scenario. The left peak corresponds to a state where the expert decides to move toward the key. Due to imperfections in π0, this state also becomes critical. The blue curve in Figure 2 represents vπRICL . The peaks of the blue curve align with those of the yellow curve (i.e., the ground truth), demonstrating that RICL effectively identifies critical states. 25 We further compare RICL with methods that explicitly utilize LLMs for credit assignment [Pignatelli et al., 2024] (represented by the green curve in Figure 13). Specifically, these methods prompt an LLM with a trajectory and ask it to identify the critical state within the sequence. We evaluate this approach on 1000 distinct trajectories, using the frequency with which a state s is labeled as critical to compute its critical score. As shown by the green curve in Figure 13, this method can only identify the "pick-up-the-key" state as critical. It fails to detect the left peak of the yellow curve. This limitation arises because identifying this critical state requires knowledge of the sampling policy π0, which is provided to but overlooked by this baseline approach. 

## H Comparisons between Retroformer and RICOL 

First, Retroformer [Yao et al., 2023] fine-tunes a reflector LLM to generate prompts for a fixed actor LLM, whereas our method fine-tunes an actor LLM using guidance from a fixed reflector LLM. The objectives of the two approaches are fundamentally orthogonal. Second, Retroformer relies on trajectory-level sparse rewards for LLM fine-tuning, whereas RICL leverages step-level dense training signals. Specifically, Retroformer requires rolling out two trajectories – one with reflector-generated hints ( τ1) and one without ( τ2) – and computes the reward as the return difference between the two, which is then used to fine-tune the reflector. In contrast, our method applies step-level dense supervision by estimating the advantage function at each time step. This is computed based on the change in policy before and after the in-context update: log πin-context updated (a|s) 

> πsampling (a|s)

. In short, for an episode of length n, RICL collects n supervised signals from n environment steps, while Retroformer requires 2n environment steps to obtain just one supervision signal. 

Retroformer estimates ∆( s0, feedback ) = V πin-context updated (s0) − V πsampling (s0), i.e., the value difference between two policies, using the difference in trajectory returns: Reward (τ1) − Reward (τ2). In contrast, our method only requires estimating the advantage function under a single policy, πsampling ,defined as A(s, a ) = Qπsampling (s, a ) − V πsampling (s). This is generally more sample-efficient. The fol-lowing experiments use the Monte Carlo method to estimate both quantities. The table below reports the mean squared error (MSE) between the estimated and ground truth values of ∆( s0, feedback )

and A(s, a ).Table 3: Approximation errors vs. number of sample trajectories. 

Number of Sample Trajectories 1,000 10,000 100,000 1,000,000 

MSE on A(s, a ) 0.1287 0.0492 0.0492 0.0454 MSE on ∆( s0, feedback ) 0.2763 0.2788 0.2713 0.2641 The results indicate that, under Monte Carlo sampling, Retroformer requires significantly more trajectories than our method to achieve accurate value estimations. Further, as shown in Figure 2 of the main paper, our actual sampling strategy (i.e., RICL) achieves over 100 × greater sample efficiency compared to the Monte Carlo baseline. Altogether, these findings demonstarte that our approach is substantially more sample-efficient than Retroformer in terms of value estimation. 26