Title: 2603.09130v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09130v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:27:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 57

Markdown Content:
FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 1

From Verification to Amplification: Auditing Reverse Image Search as Algorithmic 

Gatekeeping in Visual Misinformation Fact-checking 

Cong Lin 1 , Yifei Chen 2 , Jiangyue Chen 3 , Yingdan Lu 4 , Yilang Peng 5 , Cuihua Shen 6 

> 1

School of Journalism and Communication, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.  

> 2

Department of Public Management and Policy, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, 

USA.  

> 3

School of Journalism and Communication, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.  

> 4

Department of Communication Studies, School of Communication, Northwestern 

University, Evanston, USA.  

> 5

Department of Financial Planning, Housing and Consumer Economics at the University of 

Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.  

> 6

Department of Communication, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, USA.  

> *

Corresponding Author: 

Cuihua Shen, Address: One Shields Ave, Davis, California, 95618, USA. Email: cuishen@ucdavis.edu 

Declaration of conflicting interests 

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 

and/or publication of this article. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 2

Funding 

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of 

this article. 

Data availability statement 

Data and code are available at 

https://osf.io/f8us9/overview?view_only=f1ee786a1a7b4bac875f357c6a1b72f7. 

ORCID IDs 

Cong Lin  https://orcid.org/0009-0000-8546-8021 

Yifei Chen  https://orcid.org/0009-0006-4630-6162 

Jiangyue Chen  https://orcid.org/0009-0001-8949-4603 

Yingdan Lu  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9955-6070 

Yilang Peng  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7711-9518 

Cuihua Shen  http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1645-8211 

Author Biographies 

Cong Lin is a Ph.D. Student in the School of Journalism and Communication,Tsinghua 

University. His research interests include computational social science, visual communication, 

human-computer interaction and algorithm studies. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 3

Yifei Chen is a Ph.D. Student in the Andrew Young School of Policy Studies at Georgia State 

University. Her research interests include technology and public policy, computational social 

science, and local economic development. 

Jiangyue Chen is a Ph.D. Student in the School of Journalism and Communication at The 

Chinese University of Hong Kong. Her work focuses on algorithm studies, social media 

platforms, and computational social science. 

Yingdan Lu (Ph.D., Department of Communication, Stanford University) is an Assistant 

Professor in the Department of Communication Studies, Northwestern University. She uses 

computational and qualitative methods to understand topics like the evolution and engagement of 

digital propaganda in authoritarian regimes and how individuals encounter and communicate 

multimodal information in AI-mediated environments.. For more information, see her website: 

https://yingdanlu.com/. 

Yilang Peng (Ph.D., Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania) is an 

Associate Professor in the Department of Financial Planning, Housing and Consumer Economics 

at the University of Georgia. His scholarship is at the intersection of computational social 

science, visual communication, science communication, and social media analytics. 

Cuihua Shen (Ph.D., University of Southern California) is a Professor at the Department of 

Communication, University of California, Daivs. Her research interests include online networks, 

misinformation, and computational social science. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 4

Abstract 

As visual misinformation becomes increasingly prevalent, platform algorithms act as 

intermediaries that curate information for users’ verification practices. Yet, it remains unclear 

how algorithmic gatekeeping tools, such as reverse image search (RIS), shape users’ information 

exposure during fact-checking. This study systematically audits Google RIS by reversely 

searching newly identified misleading images over a 15-day window and analyzing 34,486 

collected top-ranked search results. We find that Google RIS returns a substantial volume of 

irrelevant information and repeated misinformation, whereas debunking content constitutes less 

than 30% of search results. Debunking content faces visibility challenges in rankings amid 

repeated misinformation and irrelevant information. Our findings also indicate an inverted U-

shaped curve of RIS results page quality over time, likely due to search engine “data voids” 

when visual falsehoods first appear. These findings contribute to scholarship of visual 

misinformation verification, and extend algorithmic gatekeeping research to the visual domain. 

Keywords : visual misinformation, reverse image search, fact-checking, Google, algorithmic 

gatekeeping, algorithm auditing, search engine FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 5FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 6

Introduction 

In the contemporary media landscape where information overload is common and users’ 

attention is limited (Lanham, 2006), digital platforms have the power to shape the visibility of 

online content and users’ information exposure (Bucher, 2012; Wallace, 2018). In particular, as 

online misinformation becomes increasingly prevalent (Vosoughi et al., 2018), platform 

algorithms act as gatekeepers that directly modulate users’ exposure not only to misinformation 

flows but also to fact checks that counteract such misinformation (Aslett et al., 2023; Chuai et 

al., 2024). For instance, social media platforms can algorithmically moderate misleading content 

(Gillespie, 2022) and users often rely on search engines to verify the veracity of information they 

encounter elsewhere (Hasanian and Elsayed, 2021). While algorithms could help users access 

debunking messages for information verification, they may also inadvertently amplify 

misinformation by prioritizing popular, yet misleading, content (Fernandez et al., 2024). 

Nevertheless, with only a few exceptions (Aslett et al., 2023; Pröllochs, 2022), the role of 

platform algorithms in misinformation verification remains underexplored in the fact-checking 

literature. Most existing studies focus on microlevel factors that shape users’ perceptions of 

information credibility, such as linguistic features of fact-checking labels (Xue et al., 2024), 

source credibility of fact checks (Liu et al., 2025), and the presentation order of debunking 

content (Peter and Koch, 2016), rather than the platform mechanisms that determine what 

content is surfaced during verification. Among all modalities of misinformation, visual 

misinformation has become increasingly pervasive, posing challenges for fact-checking. For 

example, images are susceptible to manipulation and easily repurposed across contexts to create 

misleading content (Heley et al., 2022). Understanding how algorithms process visual content is 

thus critical for navigating the multimodal media environment. However, prior studies on FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 7

algorithmic gatekeeping focus predominantly on textual information (Møller, 2022; Yang and 

Peng, 2022). Expanding this line of inquiry to visual content could help reveal how algorithms 

influence access to visual content and address the unique challenges of verifying visual 

misinformation. In contemporary information ecosystems, reverse image search (RIS) has 

emerged as one of the primary interventions for verifying visual content (Qian et al., 2023). For 

example, Google RIS has been widely employed for countering visual misinformation (Juneja 

and Mitra, 2022). Yet, it remains unclear how RIS algorithms curate and rank the image results 

during verification processes, and how misinformation features further complicate algorithmic 

gatekeeping. 

To address these gaps, this study leverages an auditing approach to examine how Google 

RIS shapes users’ information exposure in the verification process. We collected 95 misleading 

images from fact-checking organizations, and conducted seven rounds of reverse image searches 

for each within a 15-day window, which generated 34,486 top search results and associated 

metadata including sources, links, and snapshots. We assessed RIS performance by analyzing 

information relevance, veracity, and rankings of search results, while also investigating how RIS 

results page quality varied across misinformation types, topics, and search timing. 

Our findings make several contributions. Theoretically, this study discusses how 

algorithms curate information feeds for users in misinformation verification processes, and 

extends understandings of algorithmic gatekeeping to visual content, demonstrating that RIS 

algorithms could surface both debunking content and falsehoods. Methodologically, we develop 

a framework that integrates dynamic algorithm auditing with content analysis, which can be 

usefully applied to examine platform-mediated fact-checking. Practically, we find that “data 

voids” exist and RIS can amplify visual misinformation, underscoring the need for caution when FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 8

verifying emerging misleading images and highlighting the importance of platform 

accountability and users’ digital literacy. 

Theories and Research Questions 

Algorithmic Gatekeeping and Misinformation Amplification 

Gatekeeping theory in journalistic contexts traditionally posits that, as gatekeepers, 

editors in newsrooms and media organizations can select and shape which messages or news 

stories would be covered by mass media (Shoemaker and Vos, 2009; Wallace, 2018). More 

recently, scholars have identified emerging actors playing gatekeeping roles, such as platform 

algorithms (Wallace, 2018; Yang and Peng, 2022). For instance, users’ news consumption 

experiences are increasingly mediated by news aggregators (Møller, 2022), and search engines 

algorithmically retrieve and rank content relevant to users’ queries (Van Couvering, 2007). 

Unlike traditional gatekeeping grounded in journalistic norms and news values (Wallace, 2018), 

algorithms exert power through information visibility and public attention allocation, as they can 

decide selectively what content to show, filter out, emphasize, or diminish (Bucher, 2012; 

Diakopoulos, 2019; Yang and Peng, 2022), shaping the composition and structure of users’ 

information feeds (Thorson and Wells, 2016). 

As misinformation becomes increasingly prevalent, platform algorithms also play an 

important role in modulating the exposure to fake news and harmful content (Gillespie, 2022). 

Broadly, misinformation describes false or misleading information regardless of the motivation 

of the falsehood (Lazer et al., 2018). Acting as gatekeepers, social media algorithms can help 

flag misleading content to raise users’ awareness and attention (Chuai et al., 2024; Pröllochs, FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 9

2022). Also, search engine algorithms may retrieve relevant and useful information for claim 

verification (Hasanian and Elsayed, 2021). 

However, algorithms differ from journalists in their gatekeeping across the stages of 

information access, selection, and publication, often inadvertently amplifying misinformation 

(Wallace, 2018). Search engine algorithms, for example, rely on a pool of structured data and 

automated processing, potentially incorporating unreliable sources and misleading content, 

which traditional journalistic gatekeepers would likely exclude. Algorithms follow mathematical 

logic rather than normative values such as content quality, thereby excluding criteria that cannot 

be operationalized algorithmically (Wallace, 2018). For example, objectivity and fairness are 

core elements of journalistic assessments of media quality, but they are not key determinants in 

search algorithms as they are difficult to quantify (Van Couvering, 2007). Finally, algorithmic 

gatekeepers such as search engines and news aggregators publish content on their proprietary 

platforms (Wallace, 2018). As market-driven actors seeking to promote user engagement and 

time spent, these platforms have incentives to orient the recommendation results in self-serving 

ways, which increases the likelihood of surfacing biased, manipulated, or deceptive content 

(Diaz Ruiz, 2025; Rieder and Sire, 2014). 

While the potential of algorithmic amplification of misinformation is concerning, limited 

research has bridged algorithmic gatekeeping and misinformation verification scholarship to 

examine how algorithms curate information flows during users’ verification practices. This line 

of inquiry is crucial, as the content users encounter likely shapes their fact-checking outcomes 

and beliefs, which in turn shape their subsequent information-sharing behaviors. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 10 

Search Engines as Algorithmic Gatekeepers in Misinformation Verification 

Faced with the proliferation of online misinformation, professional news outlets and fact-

checking agencies act as gatekeepers by verifying claims and publishing correction posts, while 

platform algorithms moderate false content or reduce its visibility (Gillespie, 2022; Juneja and 

Mitra, 2022). In most cases, individuals encounter such debunking messages incidentally, as they 

consume news or browse social media. 

Meanwhile, individual users can also take a more active role in verification, such as 

querying search engines to assess information credibility. Unlike passive exposure to corrective 

content, users’ proactive behaviors reflect more deliberate and participatory forms of verification 

(Matanji et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2023). However, without professional guidance, individuals 

tend to follow their personal interests and predispositions (Wallace, 2018), rather than 

established fact-checking principles such as scientific evidence or source credibility. In this 

context, it becomes crucial to investigate how search engines, as algorithmic gatekeepers, shape 

the information users encounter during user-initiated fact-checking processes. 

Notably, a growing body of research has raised critical concerns about quality of search 

engine results and the effects on misinformation verification. For example, search engine 

algorithms could return both accurate and misleading content, surfacing or amplifying junk news 

(Bradshaw, 2019; Hasanian and Elsayed, 2021). Also, the ranking of search results can be 

manipulated by search engine optimization (SEO) strategies (Rieder and Sire, 2014). For 

example, by purchasing keywords, fake news websites can secure higher placement in search 

results (Bradshaw, 2019), diverting users’ attention from credible information sources. In this 

regard, users’ self-initiated fact-checking via search engines may struggle to achieve corrective 

outcomes. Aslett et al. (2024) demonstrate that searching online to verify misinformation may FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 11 

paradoxically increase users’ perceived veracity of misinformation. One explanation is that in 

contexts where reliable content is sparse, users risk entering “data voids” where search engines 

return little credible content and place non-credible information at the top of results (Boyd and 

Golebiewski, 2020). Such outcomes are not only enabled by SEO practices but also by the 

recycling of content across low-quality publishers, creating misinformation ecosystems that 

pollute search results (Aslett et al., 2024). In summary, misinformation verification outcomes are 

not only determined by platform interventions (e.g., content moderation) or fact-checkers’ 

behaviors (e.g., posting verified messages), but also conditioned by algorithmic infrastructures. 

Reverse Image Search as Algorithmic Gatekeeping 

Visual misinformation, which refers to visual content containing false and inaccurate 

presentations of information, has become increasingly prevalent in the digital media environment 

(Peng et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023). Compared to text, visuals capture greater attention, 

enhance emotional arousal, can be recalled more efficiently, and are often perceived as more 

credible due to the indexical qualities of images that reinforce realism heuristics (Hameleers et 

al., 2020; Weikmann and Lecheler, 2023). RIS is a widely adopted tool for verifying visual 

misinformation (Juneja and Mitra, 2022), which allows users to submit images as queries to 

search the web and returns the matched visuals (Qian et al., 2023). While previous gatekeeping 

research has primarily focused on textual content such as news stories or social media posts 

(Møller, 2022; Yang and Peng, 2022), little is known about how visual search reshapes 

algorithmic gatekeeping. 

Notably, search-by-image algorithms may operate through distinct logics from text-based 

ones. First, while text-based search and recommendation are driven by semantic or lexical 

matching to assess topical alignment, visual search systems like RIS rely on perceptual similarity FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 12 

involving pixel-level features of image content rather than metadata such as keywords or 

descriptions (Gaillard and Egyed-Zsigmond, 2017; Hao et al., 2021). While these algorithms can 

help users find the same image across different contexts, thereby providing cues for assisting 

image credibility assessment (Matanji et al., 2024), perceptual similarity often diverges from 

factual or contextual relevance. As a result, users may retrieve pictorially similar but out-of-

context images with misleading claims, increasing the risk of exposure to visual misinformation. 

Second, the complexity of images poses greater challenges for algorithmic processing than text. 

Images are particularly vulnerable to manipulation or editing, often leaving no visible trace 

(Weikmann and Lecheler, 2023). Traditional gatekeeping demands that journalists act as 

“gatecheckers” to manually verify image authenticity before publication, even though this 

process is highly time- and effort-consuming (Schwalbe et al., 2015). Given the lack of technical 

tools in detecting manipulated and synthetic visuals (Lu et al., 2023), algorithms are unequipped 

to verify image authenticity like traditional journalists and may retrieve visual misinformation, 

particularly when users submit manipulated or synthetic images as queries. 

Algorithmically Curated RIS Results 

Algorithmic gatekeeping operates through the allocation of public attention, shaping both 

which information users encounter and the ranking in which it appears on digital platforms 

(Yang and Peng, 2022). Information relevance serves as a key indicator of search quality (Van 

Couvering, 2007), as users with limited attention can be distracted by irrelevant results that waste 

time and reduce the efficiency of information acquisition. However, relevance alone does not 

ensure accuracy, especially in contexts where misinformation circulates widely. The veracity of 

retrieved information is another crucial criterion (Aslett et al., 2024). Together, relevance and FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 13 

veracity represent two complementary dimensions of search performance, namely, whether 

information is both contextually relevant and factually correct. 

Another critical aspect of algorithmic gatekeeping is information visibility through the 

ranking of search results (Bucher, 2012). Research consistently shows that users focus 

disproportionately on top-ranked items (Lorigo et al., 2008), making ranking logics central to 

how search engines curate results. In the context of RIS algorithms that retrieve visually similar 

images and accompanying information from the web, it is important to examine how these 

ranking mechanisms operate in a multimodal environment, and whether RIS algorithms prioritize 

credible or misleading content when users reverse search misleading visuals. Therefore, we 

propose the following research questions: 

RQ 1: When using RIS  for visual misinformation verification, how are search results 

distributed in terms of (a) information relevance and (b) information veracity? 

RQ2: When using RIS for visual misinformation verification, how are search results 

with varied information relevance and veracity ranked on results pages? 

At the results page level, the above three indicators-information relevance, veracity and 

ranking-contribute to the overall quality of RIS results pages (Hussein et al., 2020; Van 

Couvering, 2007). Here, “results page quality” represents a comprehensive approach to assessing 

RIS gatekeeping, integrating all search results to understand how effectively the algorithm 

supports reliable verification outcomes. 

Drawing on prior studies (Heley et al., 2022; Thomson et al., 2024), visual 

misinformation, specifically images, can be divided into three categories: out-of-context images 

are authentic images that have been placed together with inaccurate captions; manipulated 

images are visual content that has been edited in certain ways to distort interpretation; AI-FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 14 

generated images are those wholly fabricated by AI tools. Each type poses distinct 

computational challenges as RIS algorithms try to find visually similar content. Compared to 

manipulated images, out-of-context visual misinformation challenges RIS algorithms because, 

despite visual matching, RIS alone does not assess the alignment between images and 

accompanying captions (Gaillard and Egyed-Zsigmond, 2017), potentially yielding irrelevant or 

misleading results for verification. Also, compared to those of manipulated and out-of-context 

misinformation, queries involving AI-generated visuals may yield lower-quality results because 

such content often lacks referential matches in training or cross-validation datasets, limiting the 

algorithm’s ability to establish reliable context (Lu et al., 2023). Together, we anticipate that RIS 

results page quality would vary across visual misinformation types, as each type affords different 

levels of algorithmic processing capacity and data availability. 

Moreover, the topics of visual misinformation, particularly political versus non-political 

ones, may receive unequal debunking attention from media and fact-checking institutions, 

resulting in variations in RIS results page quality. Compared to non-political topics such as 

entertainment-related misinformation, political or election-related misinformation raises civic 

and democratic concerns and is more directly tied to the public interest (Mosleh et al., 2024). 

Professional news organizations and fact-checkers often prioritize the verification and correction 

of politically salient claims and respond more rapidly to such content (Cazzamatta, 2025). Earlier 

and more concentrated availability of debunking content increases the likelihood that RIS 

algorithms retrieve corrective information when users query related images, potentially yielding 

higher quality RIS results pages for political visual misinformation. 

Additionally, a persistent time lag often exists between the emergence of misinformation 

and the publication of corresponding fact checks (Pilarski et al., 2024). This highlights the FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 15 

importance of temporality in misinformation verification. Indeed, algorithmic gatekeeping 

differs from traditional editorial practices in its temporal dynamics. Unlike the manual and 

episodic editorial decision-making typical of newsrooms, algorithmic curation is a dynamic and 

continuous process. Content visibility is constantly recalibrated as algorithms re-rank 

information flows in response to changing engagement metrics such as clicks and reposts on 

platforms (Bucher, 2012). This temporal dynamic is salient in the visual misinformation 

verification context, where visibility may shift as the volume and popularity of misinformation 

and debunking content evolve over time (Kauk et al., 2025). Accordingly, the quality of RIS 

results pages should be conceptualized not as static but as temporally contingent, varying with 

shifts in both user engagement and content availability. Taken together, these technical, 

normative, and temporal considerations suggest that RIS performance is multidimensional and 

dynamic. Therefore, we ask: 

RQ3: How does the quality of RIS results page vary across (a) visual misinformation 

type, (b) political versus non-political visual misinformation, and (c) search timing? 

Method 

Data Collection 

We conduct an audit study to collect and analyze a large-scale, annotated dataset of 

Google RIS results. Google is the most popular search engine worldwide 1 and its RIS tool has 

been widely employed to counter visual misinformation (Juneja and Mitra, 2022). Also, 

algorithm audits can provide a systematic appraisal of potential problems in socio-technical 

systems through iterative input queries and observations of algorithmic outputs (Metaxa et al., 

2021). The data collection processes are presented in Figure 1. 2FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 16 

Figure 1 

Data Collection Processes. 

Collecting Visual Misinformation 

We first collected visual misinformation from professional fact-checking websites to 

obtain recently-verified misleading images. We selected eleven active and U.S.-based fact-

checking websites that were frequently cited in previous literature (e.g., Liu et al., 2025; Singer, 

2023; see Appendix A.1 for the full list). The misleading images were collected over seven days 

across a two-week period (August 19 to September 1, 2024): Monday, Wednesday, and Friday of 

the first week, and Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday of the second week. This design 

reduces potential bias that could arise from single-week or consecutive-day sampling. On each 

day of data collection, we visited all eleven fact-checking websites from 10 p.m. to 12 a.m. (U.S. 

Eastern Time) to identify fact checks published on that day (d0) that debunked misleading 

images. Misleading images include manipulated images, AI-generated images, and unedited 

images placed out of context (see Appendix A.2 for criteria and examples). In total, we collected 

105 misleading images. After removing duplicates and low-resolution images (e.g., screenshots 

from misleading videos), 95 misleading images remained. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 17 

Figure 2 

Illustrated Glossary of Study Terms. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 18 

Performing Reverse Image Search 

We performed RIS on every misleading image automatically using Google Cloud 

compute engine machines. We set up three virtual machines with the same architecture, 

configuration, and operating system (64bits, Debian 12, 2 GB RAM), respectively located in the 

U.S. Western, Central, and Eastern regions. This design seeks to control machine-related 

variability while also maintaining geolocation diversity. The machines were logged out of 

Google accounts and cookies were cleared to minimize personalization. For each misleading 

image, the first search happened on the next day (d1) after the fact-checking article was 

published (d0). Subsequent searches were repeated on the 2nd (d2), 3rd (d3), 5th (d5), 7th (d7), 

10th (d10), and 15th (d15) days. This temporal pattern is informed by prior work indicating that 

online collective attention frequently follows log-normal distributions, characterized by rapid 

early decay (Wu and Huberman, 2007). Even on platforms with relatively slower attention 

decay, such as YouTube, estimated content half-life falls within 8 days (Graffius, 2022), 

suggesting that a 15-day window is sufficient to capture concentrated attention before it wanes. 

Google RIS yields two types of results pages: the “Visual Matches” page and the “Exact 

Matches” page (see Figure 2). The former displays image results with similar visual features, 

while the latter returns images that are identical or nearly identical to the image submitted. 3 On 

both pages, our machines automatically scraped metadata for each search result, including title 

text, source name, link, and its display position. 

Snapshots of Search Result Links 

We manually downloaded the snapshots of unique search result links as local HTML 

files. Previous eye-tracking research indicates that most users tend not to go beyond the first FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 19 

page when Googling (Lorigo et al., 2008), so we focus on the first pages of RIS only. On “Visual 

Matches” pages, results are presented in a grid of multiple rows and three columns, 4 and only the 

first four rows were downloaded (all on the first page; three results within each row and 12 

search results at maximum). On “Exact Matches” pages, search results are displayed in a single 

vertical column, and up to the top 10 results (all on the first page before loading more) were 

downloaded. The same search result link could appear repeatedly across RIS results pages, 

search timings, and misleading images. For these links, we only downloaded their snapshots 

once ( see Appendix A.3 for details). 

The final dataset includes 95 misleading images from fact checks collected between 

August 19 and September 1, 2024, search results for each misleading image, and their unique 

search result links and snapshots. For each misleading image, we retrieved 7 non-consecutive 

days of search results over a 15-day window (d1 to d15) following its initial publication date 

(d0), resulting in a total collection period from August 20 to September 16, 2024 with 34,486 

total search results, 7,918 unique search result links and their snapshots, and 7,979 unique pairs 

of misleading images and search result links. An illustrated glossary of study terms is provided in 

Figure 2. 

Measures 

Information Relevance and Veracity 

Three authors manually annotated information relevance and veracity of unique search 

result links by referencing their original fact-checking articles where the misleading images were 

identified. Unique search result links appearing under multiple misleading images were 

annotated separately for each case. A search result link was considered “relevant” if it contained 

the same misleading image and referred to the exact same issue as the referenced fact-checking FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 20 

article; otherwise, it was considered irrelevant. For example, when an AI-generated image 

depicts the 9/11 attacks, a search result link that used the same image and addressed topics 

related to the 9/11 attacks was coded as “relevant.” 

For search results coded as “relevant”, we further coded their veracity into three 

categories. “Repeated misinformation” restates the false claims recorded by the original fact-

checking articles. “Debunking misinformation” refutes the visual misinformation recorded by the 

fact-checking article. All other search results were coded as “Other relevant information” if they 

did not directly refute or repeat the original misinformation, but provided relevant information 

(e.g., a social media post questioning the authenticity of a misleading image without refuting it). 

Detailed codebooks can be found in Appendix B.1. We conducted three rounds of training and 

coding, with each round sampling more than 200 unique search result links to resolve 

discrepancies and refine the codebook, reaching satisfactory intercoder agreement 

(Krippendorf’s α = 0.90, agreement: 95.56% for relevance; Krippendorf’s α = 0.84, agreement = 

91.67% for veracity). Three coders then coded all unique search result links. 

Search Result Ranking 

The ranking of each search result was derived from its position on the results pages. We 

assigned the top 10 results ascending ranks from 1 to 10 on “Exact Matches” pages. On “Visual 

Matches” pages, rankings were assigned to the first 12 results, appearing across the top four 

rows. Within each row, results were ordered left to right (e.g., positions 1-3 in the first row, 4-6 

in the second row). 

Quality of RIS Results Page FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 21 

We created a comprehensive score of RIS results page quality, considering search results’ 

information relevance, veracity and their rankings together. Drawing on Hussein et al. (2020), 

we computed the quality scores of RIS results pages using the following formula: 

# Quality Score  = ∑ (xi * ( n - r+1) )n

r=1 

n*( n+1) 

2

where  r is the rank of a certain search result and  n denotes the total number of search results we 

obtained from different types of results pages ( n = 10 for “Visual Matches” pages and 12 for 

“Exact Matches” pages);  xi equals 10 if a search result debunks misinformation, -10 if it repeats 

misinformation, and 0 if it is considered “other relevant information” or irrelevant altogether. 

Thus, the quality score is a continuous value, and on “Exact Matches” pages, it ranges between -

10 (e.g., all top 10 results are repeated misinformation) to 10 (all top 10 links are debunking 

misinformation). Similarly, on “Visual Matches” pages, the value is from -12 to 12. Put simply, a 

RIS results page has a greater quality score if there are more results with debunking information 

appearing in more prominent positions, and a lower score otherwise. 

Misleading Image Type and Topic 

We manually coded three categories of misleading images: out-of-context, manipulated 

and AI-generated, according to the original fact-checking articles where the misleading images 

were sourced. In terms of political versus non-political visual misinformation topics, a 

misleading image is a political one if its content is related to political figures (e.g., presidents, 

legislators) or salient political issues (e.g., war, social movement, and key policy debate). 

Otherwise, the content is non-political. Detailed codebooks can be found in Appendix B.2. Three 

authors conducted two rounds of coding of all misleading images and resolved the discrepancies, FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 22 

with a Krippendorff’s α of 0.78 (agreement = 88.07%) for image type and a Krippendorff’s α of 

0.77 (agreement = 88.77%) for political topic. 

Search Timing 

Search timing was measured as the number of days between the initial publication of the 

fact-checking article where the misleading image appeared (i.e., d0) and the date of each search 

to examine temporal variation of RIS results. It ranges from 1 to 15 days. 

Analysis 

To answer RQ1, we aggregated all search results and plotted the percentage distribution 

of content across “Visual Matches” and “Exact Matches” pages, and then conducted one-way 

ANOVAs comparing content with  varied  relevance and veracity. To answer RQ2, we plotted the 

percentage of content at each ranked position to examine variations in relevance and veracity 

across positions. For RQ3, we plotted the mean quality scores of results pages across misleading 

image types, political versus non-political topics, and search timing. Also , we conducted linear 

mixed-effects regressions predicting RIS results page quality scores, with misleading images 

treated as a random effect and geolocation included as a control variable. 

Results 

Information Relevance, Veracity and Ranking of Search Results 

RQ1 asks the distribution of search results regarding relevance and veracity. As shown in 

Figure 3, on “Visual Matches” pages, there was 78.9% irrelevant content and 10.9% repeated 

misinformation, with only 7.7% debunking content. On “Exact Matches” pages, the majority of 

results repeated the misinformation (37.2%), while 32.1% were irrelevant information and 27.7% FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 23 

were debunking content. The ANOVA analyses showed that the observed differences across 

information relevance and veracity were statistically significant on both “Visual Matches” pages 

(F(3, 7,344) = 7,706.93, p < .001), and “Exact Matches” pages ( F(3, 7,304) = 567.251, p < .001). 

Post-hoc Bonferroni-adjusted pairwise comparisons of different content categories were all 

significant on both pages (see Appendix C.1). 

Figure 3 

Percentage of Search Results by Information Relevance and Veracity On “Visual Matches” and 

“Exact Matches” Pages. 

RQ2 asks how search results from RIS are ranked. As shown in Figure 4, on “Visual 

Matches ” pages, across four rows of the collected data, the percentage of irrelevant information 

decreased with ascending rank within each row, indicating that relevant content tended to appear 

in the higher-ranked positions. However, the percentage of debunking content (24.5%) exceeded 

repeated misinformation (16.5 %) only at the top-ranked position (i.e., the first result in the first 

row ) but not at the rest . Notably, the first result of the second row (4th position) which remains 

high ly visible, had the highest likelihood of showing repeated misinformation (31.5 %). FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 24 

Figure 4 

Rankings of Search Results by Information Relevance and Veracity On “Visual Match es” and 

“Exact Match es” Pages. 

On “Exact Matches” pages, the percentage of debunking content declined from 41.7 % at 

the top position to 17.4% at the tenth, while irrelevant information increased from 19.4% to 

41.2%. The percentage of repeated misinformation remained relatively stable across ranks. 

Although this pattern suggests that RIS promotes debunking content to higher positions, only the 

first position displayed a higher proportion of debunking content (41.7%) than repeated FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 25 

misinformation (37.1%), which is consistent with results from “Visual Matches” pages. From the 

second position onward, users were more likely to encounter repeated misinformation than 

debunking content. 

RIS Results Page Quality 

RQ3 examines the variations of RIS results page quality. Across all search results, the 

mean quality scores for “Visual Matches” and “Exact Matches” pages were -0.31 and -0.59 (see 

Figure 5A), respectively, showing slight negative overall quality. 

When comparing three image types, AI-generated misleading images yielded positive 

mean quality scores on both “Visual Matches” ( M = 3.25) and “Exact Matches” ( M = 2.17) 

pages, whereas out-of-context images were associated with negative quality scores on both ( M =

-0.76 for “Visual Matches” pages; M = -1.78 for “Exact Matches” pages). This indicates that RIS 

may be less reliable in fact-checking out-of-context visual misinformation than AI-generated 

ones. For manipulated images, the quality scores were positive on “Exact Matches” pages ( M =

0.49) but negative on “Visual Matches” pages ( M = -0.28), showing that “Exact Matches” pages 

could be a relatively better source for verifying manipulated visual misinformation. Regarding 

image topics, political images can elicit results pages with relatively higher quality scores on 

both “Visual Matches” and “Exact Matches” pages than non-political ones, though all values 

remained negative. 

Figure 5B illustrates the temporal dynamics, showing that quality scores were relatively 

stable over time on both pages. However, fluctuations were more pronounced on “Exact 

Matches” pages, which also exhibited a non-linear pattern with quality score increasing from day 

1 to day 5, followed by a subsequent decline through day 15. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 26 

Figure 5 

Mean RIS Results Page Quality Scores On “Visual Matches” and “Exact Matches” Pages. 

Note. Panel A shows mean RIS results page quality scores of all images and images across 

misleading image types, political versus non-political topics; Panel B shows mean quality scores 

of all images over time. 

The regression model results are shown in Table 1. Compared to out-of-context images, 

AI-generated images got higher quality scores on the “Visual Matches” page ( b = 3.817, S.E. = FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 27 

0.917, p < .001). The linear terms of search timing (“Day” in Table 1) on the quality scores on 

“Visual Matches” pages ( b = 0.086, S.E. = 0.026, p < .001) and “Exact Matches” pages ( b =

0.251, S.E. = 0.046, p < .001) were significant and positive. The quadratic terms of search timing 

(“Day²” in Table 1) were both negative on the quality of “Visual Matches” ( b = -0.004, S.E. = 

0.002, p = .009) and “Exact Matches” pages ( b = -0.015, S.E. = 0.003, p < .001). As Figure 6 

shows, these terms jointly suggest an inverted U-shaped relationship between search timing and 

quality scores on both “Visual Matches” and “Exact Matches” pages: quality score tended to 

increase at earlier stages, peak at a certain point, and decrease thereafter. 

Table 1 

Linear Mixed-effects Regression Models Predicting Quality Scores of RIS Results Pages. 

Visual Matches Pages  Exact Matches Pages 

Estimate  S.E.  Estimate  S.E. 

Intercept  -0.956*  0.368  -2.856**  0.93 

Image Type (ref. = Out -of -context) 

AI -generated  3.817***  0.917  3.65  2.412 

Manipulated  0.311  0.426  2.026  1.112 

Image Topic (ref. = Non -political) 

Political  0.124  0.428  0.892  1.106 

Search Timing 

Linear (Day)  0.086***  0.026  0.251***  0.046 

Quadratic (Day 2) -0.004**  0.002  -0.015***  0.003 

Location (ref. = US East) 

US Central  0.008  0.074  -0.027  0.13 

US West  -0.011  0.074  -0.012  0.131 

Random effects 

σ2 1.652  5.192 

τImages  3.649  25.598 

ICC  0.69  0.83 

Observations  1,837  1827 

Log Likelihood  -3,249.781  -4,311.532 

AIC  6,519.561  8,643.061 

BIC  6,574.72  8,698.165 FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 28       

> Note . * p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p< .001

Figure 6 

Inverted U-shaped Relationship of Search Timing and Predicted Quality Scores of RIS Results 

Pages. 

Discussion 

Faced with visual misinformation, individuals often rely on algorithm-driven tools such 

as search engines to assess information credibility. This study systematically audited the Google 

RIS, offering a rare empirical evaluation of its gatekeeping role in shaping users’ information 

exposure in self-initiated visual misinformation verification. Although RIS has been widely cited 

as a promising tool for visual fact-checking, our findings show that, among all search results 

collected on the first RIS pages, debunking content constitutes less than 10% on “Visual 

Matches” pages, and less than 30% on “Exact Matches” pages. Meanwhile, more than 80% 

results on “Visual Matches” pages, and more than 60% on “Exact Matches” pages either FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 29 

repeated false claims or contributed little value for verification, yet they were often placed in 

prominent positions. We also identified an inverted U-shaped temporal pattern in RIS results 

page quality, with quality peaking 7-10 days on average after the initial publication of fact-

checking articles and declining thereafter. Together, these findings raise concerns about using 

RIS for visual misinformation verification, and contribute to the gatekeeping theory by extending 

the algorithmic gatekeeping to visual content. 

Rethinking the Efficacy of RIS for Visual Misinformation Verification 

While existing studies have predominantly explored the text-based misinformation fact-

checking (Peter and Koch, 2016; Xue et al., 2024), we argue that an increasingly multimodal 

environment warrants further exploration of visual misinformation, particularly how widespread 

algorithmic gatekeepers reshape users’ verification outcomes. Consistent with prior research that 

found text-based search engines return low-quality content that offers limited or even negative 

utility for fact-checking (Aslett et al., 2024; Hasanain and Elsayed, 2022), our investigation also 

reveals that Google RIS could potentially amplify visual misinformation, as more than 80% 

results on “Visual Matches” pages and more than 60% on “Exact Matches” pages are either 

repeated misinformation or irrelevant information. The potential risk associated with repeated 

exposure to visual misinformation is well documented: Research suggests that encountering a 

claim multiple times, regardless of its veracity, can enhance its perceived credibility through 

processing fluency (Peter and Koch, 2016). When using RIS for verification, users may be 

inadvertently exposed to visual misinformation repeatedly, potentially reinforcing rather than 

correcting false beliefs. Also, the high proportion of irrelevant content may increase users’ 

cognitive load, and thus dilute the exposure to debunking content. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 30 

The efficacy of RIS is partially dependent on the features of visual misinformation that 

users try to verify. Out-of-context visual misinformation tends to have lower quality RIS results 

pages than those of AI-generated visuals. One explanation is that current AI-generated images, 

especially photorealistic ones, exhibit distinct features such as surrealism and aesthetic 

professionalism (Peng et al., 2025), which make them easier to identify by human fact-checkers 

as well as algorithms. Also, fact-checkers are closely monitoring AI-generated falsehoods 

(Thomson et al., 2024), making fact-checks of AI-generated images more readily available than 

other visual falsehoods. Moreover, we found no clear difference between RIS results page 

quality of political and non-political visual misinformation. This likely stems from the narrow 

operationalization of “political” as election- or politician-related content, while domains such as 

health or environment also involve public-interest information that is subject to similar 

algorithmic scrutiny. 

Temporality of RIS Results Page Quality 

Notably, our analysis also demonstrates the temporality of algorithmic gatekeeping in 

visual misinformation verification: RIS results page quality initially rose with time, peaked 

around 7-10 days after the initial fact check appeared, and then plateaued or declined. This 

suggests that, at the very early stages after the publication of fact checks, not much debunking 

content can be retrieved by RIS. It echoes concerns about “data voids” (Boyd and Golebiewski, 

2020), which describes the lack of verification content from credible sources when false claims 

first emerge. As a result, search engines such as RIS may be exploited by manipulators and low 

quality websites, thereby surfacing unverified matches and misinformation. 

This inverted U-shaped curve also implies that debunking content tends to be most 

prominent a week to ten days after its publication, but that prominence may not be as durable as FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 31 

one might expect. Prior research shows that, despite consistent debunking of falsehoods, 

misinformation continues to circulate freely and widely (Singer, 2023). In the current 

information environment where messages with varied credibility compete for audiences’ 

attention, it is important to consider the constant tug-of-war between organized networks of 

malicious actors redirecting users towards misinformation (Muñoz et al., 2024) versus the one-

shot correction practices of journalists and media organizations. The temporal fluctuation of RIS 

results page quality may just reflect an eternal battle between content of various veracity, and the 

publication of fact checks merely marks the beginning, rather than the end, of that battle. 

Algorithmic Gatekeeping in Visual Misinformation Verification 

This study extends the concept of algorithmic gatekeeping to visual content. Compared 

with text-based searches guided by expertise or trustworthiness principles (Google Search 

Central, 2025), emerging RIS tools operate primarily through visual embedding and similarity 

processing (Gaillard and Egyed-Zsigmond, 2017; Hao et al., 2021). Their limited attention to the 

semantic content and quality criteria means that RIS algorithms may retrieve perceptually similar 

yet misleading images from unreliable sources. 

Also, variation in visual search parameters can therefore result in different RIS outcomes. 

Our findings illustrate that “Visual Matches” pages, which are designed to retrieve visually 

similar content, contained far less debunking content and far more irrelevant content and 

misinformation, than “Exact Matches” pages, which prioritize visually identical content. This 

suggests that algorithmic gatekeeping in the visual domain introduces more epistemic 

uncertainty for misinformation verification: differences between retrieval modes produce 

substantial shifts in the quality of available evidence, yet these shifts might remain opaque to 

users relying on visual cues. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 32 

From the perspective of user-algorithm interaction, the quality of text-based search 

results partially depends on users’ query inputs, which may or may not align with the false 

claims being verified. In contrast, images, especially AI-generated or manipulated ones, already 

constitute falsehoods when submitted into RIS. They bypass the user’s query construction 

process and directly feed misleading visual content into algorithmic systems, thereby facilitating 

the retrieval of repeated visual misinformation. Also, users process visual information differently 

from text, as the human cognition privileges visual over textual stimuli (Hockley, 2008). That is, 

even when textual and visual misinformation appear in comparable positions on search result 

pages, the visual salience and aesthetic appeal of deceptive images may disproportionately 

capture user attention and amplify persuasive influence. This highlights the need for developing 

targeted RIS algorithms to counteract the amplification of visual misinformation, for example, by 

detecting misalignment between image metadata and accompanying captions, and implementing 

ranking mechanisms that prioritize authoritative fact-checking sources. 

Implications and Limitations 

Methodologically, this study combines the auditing approach with content analysis to 

examine algorithmic gatekeeping. We extend beyond the one-time collection of algorithmic 

outputs in previous auditing studies (Juneja and Mitra, 2021; Lin et al., 2023) by repeatedly 

retrieving RIS results over a 15-day period after the initial fact check of visual misinformation. 

This design enables a longitudinal and systematic observation of the RIS results over time and 

can be usefully applied to studying the evolving nature of algorithm-driven ecosystems in other 

research settings. 

Our results also offer practical implications. First, practitioners engaged in fact-checking 

education or advocacy should be made aware of RIS’s limitations and design appropriate FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 33 

training materials and interventions. Meanwhile, fact-checkers should develop targeted strategies 

addressing distinct challenges posed by different types of visual misinformation (e.g., out-of-

context or manipulated images). Second, our study highlights the responsibility of platforms to 

fine-tune their algorithms to curb the repeated retrieval of misleading images by RIS and 

enhance accountability in content governance. Finally, this study points out the ways in which 

users could use RIS more critically, by evaluating features like visual-text alignment and search 

timing, while navigating the current media environment where truth and falsehood increasingly 

intertwine. 

This study has several limitations. First, the analysis drew from a limited sample of 95 

misleading images newly verified by professional fact-checkers in the US. In reality, users 

situated in different cultural and linguistic contexts often encounter visual misinformation from a 

more heterogeneous set of sources, many of which are not verified by fact-checkers. 

Consequently, the scope of this study does not fully capture the complexity of everyday visual 

misinformation exposure. Second, this study focused solely on top-ranked results on first pages 

of RIS, and the temporal scope of the data collection was limited to seven non-consecutive days 

within a 15-day window after the initial publication of fact checks. Expanding search results and 

extending the data collection period may yield richer and potentially different findings. Still, our 

focus on top-ranked results within a 15-day window is informed by prior research on users’ 

limited attention and its rapid decay in online information environments (Graffius, 2022; Wu and 

Huberman, 2007), and is therefore likely to capture the majority of users’ experiences. Third, 

while this study audited the quality of Google RIS results, it did not examine real users’ actual 

exposure and perceptions of misinformation. Future research should extend this work by 

employing experimental designs, to investigate how users interact with RIS outputs. Also, FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 34 

researchers could further examine how individual cognitive constraints, the attention-grabbing 

features of visual misinformation, and the dynamic competition between true and false 

information (Lanham, 2006; Vosoughi et al., 2018) shape users’ fact-checking practices via RIS 

and influence their beliefs in response to misinformation. 

Notes 

1. As of 2025, Google occupies the largest market share among various search engines. See 

https://www.statista.com/statistics/216573/worldwide-market-share-of-search-engines/ 

2. All data and codes can be found at 

https://osf.io/f8us9/overview?view_only=f1ee786a1a7b4bac875f357c6a1b72f7. 

3. For “Visual Matches”, see https://serpapi.com/google-lens-visual-matches-api; for “Exact 

Matches”, see https://serpapi.com/google-lens-exact-matches-api 

4. The number of columns may vary due to differences in browser window size or pixel 

settings. In our experiments, the “Visual Matches” results page was displayed in a three-

column layout. 

References 

Aslett K, Sanderson Z, Godel W, et al. (2024) Online searches to evaluate misinformation can 

increase its perceived veracity. Nature 625(7995): 548-556. 

Boyd D and Golebiewski M (2018) Data voids: Where missing data can easily be exploited. 

Availabel at: https://datasociety.net/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/Data_Society_Data_Voids_Final_3-1.pdf FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 35 

Bradshaw S (2019) Disinformation optimised: Gaming search engine algorithms to amplify junk 

news. Internet Policy Review 8(4): 1-24. 

Bucher T (2012) Want to be on the top? Algorithmic power and the threat of invisibility on 

Facebook. New Media & Society 14(7): 1164-1180. 

Cazzamatta R (2025) The truth game: Verification factors behind fact-checkers’ selection 

decisions. Journalism : 14648849251371952. 

Chuai Y, Tian H, Pröllochs N and Lenzini G (2024) Did the roll-out of community notes reduce 

engagement with misinformation on X/Twitter? Proceedings of the ACM on Human-

Computer Interaction 8(CSCW2): 1-52. 

Diakopoulos N (2019) Automating the news: How algorithms are rewriting the media .

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Diaz Ruiz C (2025) Disinformation on digital media platforms: A market-shaping approach. New 

Media & Society 27 (4): 2188-2211. 

Gaillard M and Egyed-Zsigmond E (2017) Large scale reverse image search. In XXXVème 

Congrès INFORSID , Toulouse, France, 30 May–2 June, pp. 127-142. 

Gillespie T (2022) Do not recommend? Reduction as a form of content moderation. Social 

Media+ Society 8(3): 20563051221117552. 

Google Search Central (2025) Creating helpful, reliable, people-first content. Available at: 

https://developers.google.com/search/docs/fundamentals/creating-helpful-

content?utm_source=chatgpt.com FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 36 

Graffius SM (2022) Lifespan (half-life) of social media posts: Update for 2022. Social Media 

Analytics Blog. Available at: https://www.scottgraffius.com/blog/files/social-2022.html 

Hameleers M, Powell TE, Van Der Meer TG and Bos L (2020) A picture paints a thousand lies? 

The effects and mechanisms of multimodal disinformation and rebuttals disseminated via 

social media. Political Communication 37(2): 281–301. 

Hasanain M and Elsayed T (2022) Studying effectiveness of Web search for fact checking. 

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 73(5): 738-751. 

Heley K, Gaysynsky A and King AJ (2022) Missing the bigger picture: The need for more 

research on visual health misinformation. Science Communication 44(4): 514-527. 

Hockley WE (2008) The picture superiority effect in associative recognition. Memory & 

Cognition 36(7): 1351-1359. 

Hao Q, Luo L, Jan ST and Wang G (2021) It's not what it looks like: Manipulating perceptual 

hashing based applications. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on 

Computer and Communications Security , Virtual Event, Republic of Korea, 15-19 

November, pp. 69-85. 

Hussein E, Juneja P and Mitra T (2020) Measuring misinformation in video search platforms: An 

audit study on YouTube. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 

4(CSCW1): 1-27. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 37 

Juneja P and Mitra T (2021) Auditing e-commerce platforms for algorithmically curated vaccine 

misinformation. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems , Yokohama, Japan, 8-13 May, pp. 1-27. New York: ACM Press. 

Juneja P and Mitra T (2022) Human and technological infrastructures of fact-checking. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6(CSCW2): 1-36. 

Kauk J, Kreysa H and Schweinberger SR (2025) Large-scale analysis of fact-checked stories on 

Twitter reveals graded effects of ambiguity and falsehood on information reappearance. 

PNAS Nexus 4(2): pgaf028. 

Lanham RA (2006) The economics of attention: Style and substance in the age of information .

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Lin C, Gao Y, Ta N, et al. (2023) Trapped in the search box: An examination of algorithmic bias 

in search engine autocomplete predictions. Telematics and Informatics 85: 102068. 

Liu X, Qi L, Wang L and Metzger MJ (2025) Checking the fact-checkers: The role of source 

type, perceived credibility, and individual differences in fact-checking effectiveness. 

Communication Research 52(6): 719-746. 

Lorigo L, Haridasan M, Brynjarsdóttir H, et al. (2008) Eye tracking and online search: Lessons 

learned and challenges ahead. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 

and Technology 59(7): 1041-1052. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 38 

Lu Z, Huang D, Bai L, et al.  (2023) Seeing is not always believing: Benchmarking human and 

model perception of AI-generated images. Advances in Neural Information Processing 

Systems 36: 25435-25447. 

Matanji F, Tully M, Mudavadi KC, et al. (2024) Media literacy and fact-checking as proactive 

and reactive responses to misinformation in Kenya and Senegal. African Journalism 

Studies 9: 1-18. 

Metaxa D, Park JS, Robertson RE, et al. (2021) Auditing algorithms: Understanding algorithmic 

systems from the outside in. Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction 

14(4): 272-344. 

Mosleh M, Yang Q, Zaman T, et al. (2024) Differences in misinformation sharing can lead to 

politically asymmetric sanctions. Nature 634(8034): 609-616. 

Møller LA (2022) Recommended for you: How newspapers normalise algorithmic news 

recommendation to fit their gatekeeping role. Journalism Studies 23(7): 800-817. 

Muñoz P, Díez F and Bellogín A (2024) Modeling disinformation networks on Twitter: 

Structure, behavior, and impact. Applied Network Science 9(1): 1-35. 

Peng Y, Lu Y and Shen C (2023) An agenda for studying credibility perceptions of visual 

misinformation.  Political Communication 40(2): 225-237. 

Peng Q, Lu Y, Peng Y, et al.  (2025) Crafting synthetic realities: Examining visual realism and 

misinformation potential of photorealistic AI-generated images. In: Proceedings of the FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 39 

Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,

Yokohama, Japan, 26 April-1 May, pp. 1-12. New York: ACM Press. 

Peter C and Koch T (2016) When debunking scientific myths fails (and when it does not): The 

backfire effect in the context of journalistic coverage and immediate judgments as 

prevention strategy. Science Communication 38(1): 3-25. 

Pilarski M, Solovev KO and Pröllochs N (2024) Community notes vs. snoping: How the crowd 

selects fact-checking targets on social media. In Proceedings of the International AAAI 

Conference on Web and Social Media, Buffalo, New York, USA, 3-6 June, pp. 1262-

1275. Washington, DC: AAAI Press. 

Pröllochs N (2022) Community-based fact-checking on Twitter’s Birdwatch platform. In 

Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, Atlanta, 

Georgia, USA, 6–9 June, pp. 794-805. Washington, DC: AAAI Press. 

Qian S, Shen C and Zhang J (2023) Fighting cheapfakes: Using a digital media literacy 

intervention to motivate reverse search of out-of-context visual misinformation. Journal 

of Computer-Mediated Communication 28(1): zmac024. 

Rieder B and Sire G (2014) Conflicts of interest and incentives to bias: A microeconomic 

critique of Google’s tangled position on the Web. New Media & Society 16(2): 195-211. 

Schwalbe CB, Silcock BW and Candello E (2015) Gatecheckers at the visual news stream: A 

new model for classic gatekeeping theory. Journalism Practice 9(4): 465-483. 

Shoemaker PJ and Vos T (2009) Gatekeeping theory . London: Routledge. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 40 

Singer JB (2023) Closing the barn door? Fact-checkers as retroactive gatekeepers of the COVID-

19 “infodemic”. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 100(2): 332-353. 

Thomson TJ, Thomas RJ and Matich P (2024) Generative visual AI in news organizations: 

Challenges, opportunities, perceptions, and policies. Digital Journalism 4: 1-22. 

Thorson K and Wells C (2016) Curated flows: A framework for mapping media exposure in the 

digital age. Communication Theory 26(3): 309-328. 

Van Couvering E (2007) Is relevance relevant? Market, science, and war: Discourses of search 

engine quality. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12(3): 866-887. 

Vosoughi S, Roy D and Aral S (2018) The spread of true and false news online. Science 

359(6380): 1146-1151. 

Wallace J (2018) Modelling contemporary gatekeeping: The rise of individuals, algorithms and 

platforms in digital news dissemination. Digital Journalism 6(3): 274-293. 

Weikmann T and Lecheler S (2023) Visual disinformation in a digital age: A literature synthesis 

and research agenda. New Media & Society 25(12): 3696-3713. 

Whittaker J, Looney S, Reed A and Votta F (2021) Recommender systems and the amplification 

of extremist content. Internet Policy Review 10(2): 1-29. 

Wu F and Huberman BA (2007) Novelty and collective attention. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences 104(45): 17599-17601. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 41 

Xue H, Zhang J, Shen C and Wojcieszak M (2024) The majority of fact-checking labels in the 

United States are intense and this decreases engagement intention. Human 

Communication Research 50(4): 530-544. 

Yang T and Peng Y (2022) The importance of trending topics in the gatekeeping of social media 

news engagement: A natural experiment on Weibo. Communication Research 49(7): 994-

1015. 

Yang Y, Davis T and Hindman M (2023) Visual misinformation on Facebook. Journal of 

Communication 73(4): 316-328. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 42 

Supplementary Information 

From Verification to Amplification? Auditing Reverse Image Search as Algorithmic 

Gatekeeping in Visual Misinformation Fact-checking 

Contents 

Appendix A: More Information on Data Collection  ................................................................ ......43 

A.1. Selection of Visual Misinformation Sources.  ................................................................ 43 

A.2. Selection Criteria for Misleading Images  ................................................................ ......44 

A.3. An Investigation of Repeated RIS Result Links  ................................ ............................46 

Appendix B. Codebooks and Human Coder Training  ................................................................ ...47 

B.1. Information Relevance and Veracity ................................................................ ..............47 

B.2. Misleading Image Type and Topic ................................................................ .................51 

Appendix C: Additional Results  ................................................................................................ ....56 

C.1. Post-hoc Pairwise Comparisons  ................................................................ ....................56 

References  ................................................................................................................................ ......57 FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 43 

Appendix A: More Information on Data Collection 

A.1. Selection of Visual Misinformation Sources. 

We compiled fact-checking websites from the lists of credible fact-checking 

organizations published by Duke Reporters’ Lab (https://reporterslab.org/fact-checking/) and 

International Fact-Checking Network (https://www.poynter.org/ifcn/). Previous literature has 

used these lists (e.g., Graves and Mantzarlis, 2020; Liu et al., 2025; Vinhas and Bastos, 2022). 

We selected fact-checking websites that satisfied all following criteria: 1) it had published fact-

checking articles within the past 7 days before data collection started, 2) it is based in the U.S., 

and 3) it had published image-related fact-checking content in 2024. At the end, 11 fact-checking 

websites were included. 

Table A.1. Eleven fact-checking organizations and their URLs.             

> Name URL
> AFP Fact Check https://factcheck.afp.com/
> Check Your Fact https://checkyourfact.com/
> FactCheck.org https://www.factcheck.org/
> Lead Stories https://leadstories.com/
> PolitiFact https://www.politifact.com/
> Reuters Fact Check https://www.reuters.com/fact-check/
> Snopes https://www.snopes.com/latest/
> The Dispatch Fact Check https://thedispatch.com/category/fact-check/
> USA Today Fact Check https://www.usatoday.com/news/factcheck/
> Verify This https://www.verifythis.com/
> Washington Post Fact Check https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/fact-checker/

FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 44 

A.2. Selection Criteria for Misleading Images 

The selection of visual misinformation was guided by the definition that the visual 

element misguides audiences through false and inaccurate presentations of information, 

including manipulating images, images misplaced out of context, and AI-generated images. 

Figure A.1 below offers some examples: a1 and a3 were included because certain parts of 

the two images (e.g., the text) were manipulated to convey misinformation. And a2 was included 

as it was a totally AI-generated image. For out-of-context visual misinformation, unedited 

images were retained only when the image itself was contextually specific and constituted a core 

element of the misleading claim. For example, image a4 was included because the visual features 

of the image triggered controversy over toilet signage at the 2024 U.S. Democratic National 

Convention. In contrast, cases in which the misleading claim appeared primarily in the text, 

while the image merely served as a generic illustration (e.g., general photographs of celebrities 

or politicians in b), were excluded, as the image did not materially contribute to the 

misinformation. 

Figure A.1 Examples of included and excluded misleading images. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 45 FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 46 

A.3. An Investigation of Repeated RIS Result Links 

A pilot study with 80 unique search result links on three days showed that there were no 

changes of snapshots of search result links after the initial publication. During the official data 

collection process, from August 20th, 2024, to September 16th, 2024, we further sampled 10% 

of all unique links from each day and repeatedly saved the snapshots of a total of 274 search 

result links on the seven days ( N = 1918) in a 15-day time span. We found that only 10 (3.6%) of 

the links underwent changes. For the 10 links, only one social media link was tagged 

“misleading” starting from the second day and other links cannot be opened on later days during 

the period. Therefore, we believe downloading the snapshots of repeated links only once would 

not significantly impact the RIS results. FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 47 

Appendix B. Codebooks and Human Coder Training 

B.1. Information Relevance and Veracity 

The human annotators executed the coding process based on iteratively developed coding 

schemes. Three rounds of training have been conducted with samples from 200 to 500 in each 

round. Three coders also discussed their individual annotation heuristics and resolved the 

discrepancies. To evaluate the reliability of the results, we used Krippendorff’s α to assess 

intercoder agreement. The final intercoder reliability was satisfactory, with Krippendorff’s α 

values of 0.90 for relevance (agreement: 95.56%) and 0.84 for veracity (agreement: 91.67%). 

The codebook can be found below. 

Table B.1 . Code book for information relevance. 

Category  Definitions  Code 

Relevant  A link is seen as relevant when its content meets the following two 

criteria: 

a. The content uses the same image as our visual 

misinformation. 

b. The content in the link is about the exact same issue and 

event as in the fact-checking article of the relevant 

misinformation. 

Example: 

If the fact-checked image is an AI-generated image about 2001, 9/11 

attacks, a search result link containing the same image and talking 

about the related topic is considered “Relevant”. 

1FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 48 

Fact-checking article : https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-fake-photo-shows-five-dancing-israelis-on-

september-11-2001-world-trade-center-attacks.html 

Search result link: 

https://x.com/CensoredMen/status/1823843057869164644 

Irrelevant  A link is coded as “Irrelevant” if the link content does not contain the 

misleading image that we are fact-checking. 

0FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 49 

Table B.2 . Code book for information veracity. 

Category  Definitions  Code 

Repeated 

misinformation 

The link content repeats the relevant false claims that are related to 

our visual misinformation based on the fact-checking article of the 

corresponding misleading image. 

Example: 

Fact-checking article : https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-dnc-did-not-eliminate-womens-bathrooms-

turn-them-into-gender-neutral-bathrooms.html 

Search result link: 

https://x.com/SarahisCensored/status/1825692785565184203 

1

Debunking 

misinformation 

Content that tags or refutes the visual misinformation, such as: 

a. debunking articles from fact-checking organizations/news 

media; 

b. posts that are tagged on the social media platform; 

c. posts that contain correct information/stating the 

misinformation is incorrect. 

Example: 

2FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 50 

Fact-checking article : https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-photo-does-not-genuinely-show-pope-

francis-wearing-rainbow-scarf.html 

Search result link: 

https://x.com/brixwe/status/1824084275257294850 

Other 

information 

Relevant, but non-misinformation, and non-debunking content, 

providing original context or questioning cues for the 

misinformation. For example: 

a. a post that puts forward questions on the visual 

misinformation; 

b. the same image published in a different context 

Example: 

Fact-checking article : https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/us-

map-climate-change/ 

Search result link: 

https://www.ecoclimax.com/2020/07/mediterranean-sea.html 

3FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 51 

B.2. Misleading Image Type and Topic 

For visual misinformation types, two rounds of training of three human coders were conducted, 

and the final agreement reached 88.07% with a satisfactory Krippendorff’s alpha value (0.778). 

The codebook can be found below. 

Table B.3. The codebook of visual misinformation type. 

Category  Definitions  Code 

AI-generated  Fact-checking articles explicitly mentioned that the visual content is 

wholly fabricated by AI tools. 

Example: 

Fact-checking article: https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-taylor-swift-did-not-endorse-donald-

trump-in-august-2024.html 

1FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 52 

Fact-checking article: https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-fake-photo-shows-five-dancing-israelis-

on-september-11-2001-world-trade-center-attacks.html 

Manipulated  Visual content that has been modified in some way to guide the 

interpretation of the visual information or the larger message unit 

Example: 

Fact-checking article: 

https://factcheck.afp.com/doc.afp.com.36EP9TP 

2FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 53 

Fact-checking article: https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-fake-photo-shows-biden-harris-supporters-

holding-give-up-your-guns-and-abolish-the-2a-signs.html 

Out-of-context  Unedited and generally authentic visual content alongside text or 

audio that provides inaccurate or misleading information or context. 

Example: 

Fact-checking article: https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-dnc-did-not-eliminate-womens-

bathrooms-turn-them-into-gender-neutral-bathrooms.html 

3FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 54 

For political versus non-political visual misinformation, two rounds of training of three human 

coders were conducted, and the final agreement reached 88.77% with a satisfactory 

Krippendorff’s alpha value (0.765). The codebook can be found below. 

Table B.4. The codebook of visual misinformation topic. 

Category  Definitions  Code 

Non-political  Content that is oriented towards areas including lifestyle, 

entertainment, sports, and science. 

Example: 

Fact-checking article: https://checkyourfact.com/2024/08/23/fact-

check-disney-selling-abc-20-billion/ 

0

Political  Content related to political figures (e.g., president and legislators) 

and salient political issues (e.g., war, social movement, and key 

policy debate) 

Example: 

Fact-checking article: https://leadstories.com/hoax-

alert/2024/08/fact-check-taylor-swift-did-not-endorse-donald-

trump-in-august-2024.html 

1FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 55 FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 56 

Appendix C: Additional Results 

C.1. Post-hoc Pairwise Comparisons 

To compare the percentage distributions of content with varied relevance and veracity, we 

performed one-way ANOVAs. Significant results were found on both “Visual Matches” page 

(F(3, 7 ,344) = 7 ,706.93, p < .001), and “Exact matches” page ( F(3, 7 ,304) = 567.251, p < .001). 

We also conducted Bonferroni-adjusted post-hoc pairwise comparisons of the percentages of 

different content. The results can be seen in Table C.1, which shows that on both “Visual 

Matches” and “Exact matches” pages, there is more repeated misinformation than debunking 

misinformation. 

Table C.1. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons (Bonferroni-adjusted) of the percentages of content 

with varied relevance and veracity. 

Estimate  S.E.  df  t p-value  Cohen's d 

“Visual Matches” Page 

Irrelevant Info. - Debunking Misinfo.  0.711  0.006  7,344  122.404  <.001  4.039 

Repeated Misinfo. - Debunking Misinfo.  0.032  0.006  7,344  5.457  <.001  0.180 

Repeated Misinfo. - Irrelevant Info.  -0.680  0.006  7,344  -116.947  <.001  -3.859 

Other Info. - Irrelevant Info.  -0.764  0.006  7,344  -131.389  <.001  -4.335 

Other Info. - Repeated Misinfo.  -0.084  0.006  7,344  -14.442  <.001  -0.477 

Other Info. - Debunking Misinfo.  -0.052  0.006  7,344  -8.985  <.001  -0.296 

“Exact Matches” Page 

Irrelevant Info. - Debunking Misinfo.  0.044  0.009  7,304  4.851  <.001  0.161 

Repeated Misinfo. - Debunking Misinfo.  0.094  0.009  7,304  10.52  <.001  0.348 

Repeated Misinfo. - Irrelevant Info.  0.051  0.009  7,304  5.668  <.001  0.188 

Other Info. - Irrelevant Info.  -0.290  0.009  7,304  -32.294  <.001  -1.068 

Other Info. - Repeated Misinfo.  -0.341  0.009  7,304  -37.963  <.001  -1.256 

Other Info. - Debunking Misinfo.  -0.246  0.009  7,304  -27.443  <.001  -0.908 FROM VERIFICATION TO AMPLIFICATION 57 

References 

Graves L and Mantzarlis A (2020) Amid political spin and online misinformation, fact checking 

adapts. The Political Quarterly 91(3): 585-591. 

Liu X, Qi L, Wang L and Metzger MJ (2025) Checking the fact-checkers: The role of source 

type, perceived credibility, and individual differences in fact-checking effectiveness. 

Communication Research 52(6): 719-746. 

Vinhas O and Bastos M (2022) Fact-checking misinformation: Eight notes on consensus 

reality. Journalism Studies 23(4): 448-468.